Add hierarchical consensus spec (#113)
protocol/ConsensusLab: specs/hierarchical_consensus.md

[Cross-net routing gas price](#Cross-net-routing-gas-price "Cross-net routing gas price") | WIP/Draft |   | |N/A |

## Introduction
At a high level, hierarchical consensus (HC) allows for incremental, on-demand blockchain scaling and simplifies the deployment of new use cases with clearly isolated security domains that provide flexibility for varied use cases.

Consensus, or establishing total order across transactions, poses a major scalability bottleneck in blockchain networks. This is particularly the case when all validators are required to process all transactions. Regardless of the specific consensus protocol implementation used, this makes blockchains unable to increase their performance by adding more participants (scale-out).

In traditional distributed computing, one possible approach to overcoming this limitation is to resort to the partitioning, or sharding, of state processing and transaction ordering. In a sharded system the blockchain stack is divided into different groups called shards, each operated by its own set of nodes, which keep a subset of the state and are responsible for processing a part of the transactions sent to the system. 

> The main challenge with applying traditional sharding to the Byzantine fault-tolerant context of the blockchain lies in the security/performance tradeoff. As miners are assigned to shards, there is a danger of diluting security when compared to the original single-chain (single-shard) solution. In both proof-of-work and proof-of-stake (PoS) blockchains, sharding may give the attacker the ability to compromise a single shard with only a  fraction of the mining power, potentially compromising the system as a whole. Such attacks are often referred to as _1\% attacks_. To circumvent them, sharding systems need to periodically reassign miners to shards in an unpredictable way, so as to cope with a semi-dynamic adversary. We believe that this traditional approach to scaling, which considers the system as a monolith, is not suitable for decentralized blockchains due to their complexity.  <!--and the fact that sharded systems reshuffle state without the consent of its owners, disrupting use cases that benefit from finer control over the system topology.-->

Reviewer: "Such attacks are often referred to as 1% attacks. " --- perhaps give reference(s)

> With __Hierarchical Consensus__ we depart from the traditional sharding approach and instead of algorithmically assigning node membership and load balancing the distribution of the state, we follow an approach where users and miners are grouped into subnets in which they can freely partake. Users (i.e. network participants) can spawn new independent networks, or child subnets, from the one they are operating in. __Each subnet can run its own independent consensus algorithm and set its own security and performance guarantees.__ Subnets in the system are organized hierarchically: each has one parent subnet and any number of child subnets, except for the root subnet (called _root network_ or _rootnet_), which has no parent and is the initial anchor of trust. To mitigate the 1\% attacks pertinent to traditional sharding, subnets in hierarchical consensus are firewalled, in the sense that a security violation in a given subnet is limited, in effect, to that particular subnet and its children, with bounded economic impact on its ancestors. This bounded impact of an attack is, at most, the circulating supply of the parent token in the child subnet. Moreover, ancestor subnets help secure their descendant subnets through _checkpointing_, which helps alleviate attacks on a child subnet, such as long-range and related attacks in the case of a PoS-based subnet.

Reviewer: "subnets in hierarchical consensus are firewalled" - give reference to https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8835275

Reviewer: perhaps also give somewhere a link to the DINPS paper/our TR.

- `Raw()`: Returns the raw address of the hierarchical address. If it is not an HA, it still returns the corresponding raw address.
- `Subnet()`: It returns the subnet ID of the HA. It returns an error or an `Subnet.Undef` if the address is not an HA.
- `PrettyString()`: Returns a beutified version of an HA address like `/root/f0100:<raw address>`. This is method is only available for HA. For the rest of addresses it just returns `String()`. 

Finally, a pair of keys from a user control the same address in every subnet in the system. Thus, the raw address determines the ownership of a specific HA. 

## Checkpointing
Checkpoints are used to anchor a subnet's security to that of its parent network, as well as to propagate information from a child chain to other subnets in the system. Checkpoints for a subnet can be verified at any point using the state of the subnet chain which can then be used to generate proofs of misbehaviors in the subnet (or so-called _fraud/fault proofs_) which, in turn, can be used for penalizing misbehaving entities (_"slashing"_). See [detectable misbehaviors](#Detectable-misbehaviors "Detectable misbehaviors") for further details.

> Checkpoints need to be signed by miners of a child chain and committed to the parent chain through their corresponding `SA`. The specific signature policy is defined in the `SA` and determines the type and minimum number of signatures required for a checkpoint to be accepted and validated by the `SA` for its propagation to the top chain. Different signature schemes may be used here, including multi-signatures or threshold signatures among subnet miners. For instance, in the reference implementation of `SA`, the actor waits for `2/3` of the validators in the subnet to send the valid checkpoint signed before propagating it to the `SCA` for commitment. Alternative verification policies for a subnet can be implemented in the `SubmitCheckpoint()` function of the subnet actor interface. 

Reviewer: menion and link to https://github.com/filecoin-project/mir for "reference implementation of SA" also it should be more than `2/3` and not `2/3`

Reviewer 2: A concise notation I have seen for that is `+2/3`.

To overcome this issue, `SCA` in subnets include the `Save()` function and peers will implement a protocol to backup the state of the function in any storage system where data can be retrievable and available independently of the state of a subnet (let this be Filecoin storage, IPFS, or any other decentralized or centralized storage systems). Having the state always available is key for:
- The execution and validations of cross-net messages.
- Creating fraud/fault proofs from detectable misbehaviors in a subnet.
- Migrating the state of a subnet and spawning a new subnet from the existing state of another network.

> > TODO: For this puropse, a `Persistence` interface will be explored and implemented in future iterations of the protocol. Ideally we should piggy-back from all the available storage in the Filecoin network, FVM native integration with storage primitives, and all the data retrievable work being done by CryptoNetLab.

Reviewer: data retrievabillity (typo), give link to CryptoNetLab work (as it is unclear from here) and also perhaps mention Filecoin Saturn work (retrieval.market)

	Checkpoint Checkpoint
	// LockedState being propagated (if any).
	Locked atomic.LockedState
    // address wrapped as string to support undef serialization
	Actor  string 
}
```

![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/rJd0_6tK9.png)

### Data availability
Peers requesting content from others subnets trust that the peers in the other network from which a checkpoint with cross-messages has been propagated will resolve the content resolution requests sent to the subnet. Intuitively, the node that triggered the cross-message has no incentive on denying access to this data (as his funds have already been burnt), but data availability is an issue that is worth addressing further. The aforementioned design of the content resolution protocol assumes at least _one honest participant in the subnet_ (i.e. a peer that always answers successfully to content resolution requests) _and that the data in the subnet is always available_. In a real environment these assumption may not hold, and more complex schemes may be needed to incentivize subnet peers and ensure that every content resolution request between subnets is fulfilled, and a high-level of availability of data.

> To overcome this issue, `SCA` in subnets include the `Save()` function and peers will implement a protocol to backup the state of the function in any storage system where data can be retrievable and available independently of the state of a subnet (let this be Filecoin storage, IPFS, or any other decentralized or centralized storage systems). Having the state always available is key for:

Reviewer 2: What exactly do we mean by "back up the state of the function". Which function? Should this include all state of all actors, or just HC related? Aren't there general mechanisms provided by certain Filecoin clients perhaps to save and restore the ledger state as a whole? Is there anything like archival nodes?

> LockableActor interface
```go
// LockableActor defines the interface that needs to be implemented by actors
// that want to support the atomic execution of some (or all) of their functions.
type LockableActor interface {
    // Inherits from the core interface for VM actors
    runtime.VMActor
    // Lock defines how to lock the state in the actor.
    // (methodNum = 2)
    Lock(rt runtime.Runtime, params *LockParams) cid.Cid
    // Merge takes external locked state and merges it to 
    // the current actors state.
    // (methodNum = 3)
    Merge(rt runtime.Runtime, params *MergeParams) *abi.EmptyValue
    // Finalize merges the output of an execution and unlocks the state.
    // (methodNum = 4)
    Finalize(rt runtime.Runtime, params *UnlockParams) *abi.EmptyValue
    // Abort unlocks the state and aborts the atomic execution.
    // (methodNum = 5)
    Abort(rt runtime.Runtime, params *LockParams) *abi.EmptyValue
    // StateInstance returns an instance of the lockable actor state
    StateInstance() LockableActorState
}
```

> - The state of the actor needs to implement the `LockableActorState` interface that determines how to access persisted state from locked states and outputs from an execution. Actors supporting atomic executions are required to persist and make locked state retrieval for the operation of the protocol. In the reference implementation of the protocol, `LockableActor`s include a `LockedMapCID` HAMT that persists the locked state of all ongoing atomic executions where the key is the `CID`, that uniquely identifies the locked state, and the value is the `LockedState`. Of course, the actor state needs to be CBOR-deserializable. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The state of the actor needs to implement the `LockableActorState` interface that determines how to access persisted state from locked states and outputs from an execution. Actors supporting atomic executions are required to persist and make locked state retrievable for the operation of the protocol. In the reference implementation of the protocol, `LockableActor`s include a `LockedMapCID` HAMT that persists the locked state of all ongoing atomic executions where the key is the `CID`, which uniquely identifies the locked state, and the value is the `LockedState`. Of course, the actor state needs to be CBOR-deserializable. 
```

> LockableActorState interface
```go
type LockableActorState interface {
	cbg.CBORUnmarshaler
	// LockedMapCid returns the cid of the root for the locked map
	LockedMapCid() cid.Cid
	// Output returns locked output from the state.
	Output(*LockParams) *LockedState
}
```

> - Any object of the state that needs to be lockable, has to implement the `LockableState` interface. The object needs to be CBOR-serializable (like any other actor state) and it needs to implement the desired merging logic (the strategy used to merge distinct states of the object in the state ---this logic is contract-specific---).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Any object of the state that needs to be lockable, has to implement the `LockableState` interface. The object needs to be CBOR-serializable (like any other actor state) and it needs to implement the desired merging logic (the contract-specific strategy used to merge distinct states of an object).
```

> > `Lockablestate`interface.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> `LockableState`interface.
```

UnwrapLockableState(s *LockedState, out LockableState) error
```

- Finally, to signal the specific methods and parameters for which the atomic execution protocol is being performed, message params for `LockableActor`s have the following structure.
> Params of atomic execution methods
```go
// LockParams wraps serialized params from a message with the requested methodnum.
type LockParams struct {
    Method abi.MethodNum
    Params []byte
}

// UnlockParams identifies the input params of a message
// along with the output state to merge.
type UnlockParams struct {
    Params *LockParams
    State  []byte
}

// MergeParams wraps locked state to merge in params.
type MergeParams struct {
    State []byte
}
```

#### Implementation of the protocol
The atomic execution protocol consists of the following phases, which, combined, resemble a two-phase commit protocol with the `SCA` of the least common ancestor/parent serving as a coordinator:

- __Initialization__: To signal the start of an atomic execution, the parties involved interact off-chain to agree on the specific execution they want to perform and the input state it will involve. 

>     - To start the execution, each party needs to lock, in their subnet, the state that will be used as input for the execution. This is done by sending a message to the `Lock()` function to the address of the `LockableActor` involved in the execution indicating in the `LockParams` the `MethodNum` and `Params` the parties agreed on for the atomic execution. `Lock()` returns the `CID` of the locked state and persists it in the corresponding `LockedStateRegistry` of the actor. Locking the state prevents new messages from affecting the state and leading to inconsistencies when the output state is migrated back. From now on, the actor won't accept any message involving the state locked. The locking of the input state in each subnet signals the beginning of the atomic execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - To start the execution, each party needs to lock, in their subnet, the state that will be used as input for the execution. This is done by sending a message to the `Lock()` function of the `LockableActor` involved in the execution, indicating in the `LockParams` the `MethodNum` and `Params` the parties agreed on for the atomic execution. `Lock()` returns the `CID` of the locked state and persists it in the corresponding `LockedStateRegistry` of the actor. Locking the state prevents new messages from affecting the state and leading to inconsistencies when the output state is migrated back. From now on, the actor won't accept any message involving the locked state. The locking of the input state in each subnet signals the beginning of the atomic execution.
```

    - One of the parties needs to initialize the execution by sending an `InitAtomicExec` message to the `SCA` of the parent responsible for orchestrating the execution specifying the `AtomicExecParams` (i.e. the list of messages and a map with the HA address and the `CID` of the input state for all the parties involved). If the initiator already has performed the off-chain execution (see next bullet), it can also submit the CID of its output state as part of the initialization message.

>     - In its current implementation `SCA` verifies that is the common parent of all parties to accept the execution. To uniquely identify it computes the `CID` of the atomic execution (by computing the `CID` the `AtomicExecParams`). This `CID` identifies the atomic execution in the `SCA` through all its life. If the `InitAtomicExec` message succeed a new atomic execution is spawned for that CID in an `ExecInitialized` state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - In its current implementation, the `SCA` verifies that it is the common parent of all parties that accepted the execution. To uniquely identify the atomic execution, it computes the `CID` of the `AtomicExecParams`. This `CID` identifies the atomic execution in the `SCA` throughout its life. If the `InitAtomicExec` message succeeds, a new atomic execution is spawned for that CID in an `ExecInitialized` state.
```

> > Note: At this point there's no deduplication of atomic executions in the same `SCA`. An atomic execution with the same `AtomicExecParams` can't be run twice in the same `SCA`. This is a limitation of the MVP implementation and it will be fixed in the next iteration by adding a nonce (see [issue](https://github.com/filecoin-project/eudico/issues/147).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Note: At this point there's no deduplication of atomic executions in the same `SCA`. An atomic execution with the same `AtomicExecParams` can't be run twice in the same `SCA`. This is a limitation of the MVP implementation and it will be fixed in the next iteration by adding a nonce (see [issue](https://github.com/filecoin-project/eudico/issues/147)).
```

- __Off-chain execution__: Each party only holds part of the state required for the execution. In order for the parties in the execution to be able to execute locally, they need to request the state locked in the other subnet. 
    - The `CID` of the input state is shared between the different parties in the execution during the initialization stage, and is leveraged by each party to request from the other subnets the locked input states involved in the execution. 

>     - On the reception of the `CID` from the involved parties, peers can perform a request to the content resolution protocol for the `CID` of the input state in their source subnets by sending a `PullLocked` message. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - On receiving the `CID` from the involved parties, peers can perform a request to the content resolution protocol for the `CID` of the input state in their source subnets by sending a `PullLocked` message. 
```

    - Once every input state is received for all the `CID`s of the input state involved in the execution, each party runs the execution off-chain to compute the output state. This execution is performed by creating a temporal view of the state of the contract and merging the locked state from the other subnets. With the state ready, the every message of the atomic execution are implicitly applied ([see code](https://github.com/filecoin-project/eudico/blob/bb52565105f7fe716463b1e09dad7492569089f5/chain/consensus/hierarchical/atomic/exec/exec.go#L32) for further details).
    - The `OutputState` for the execution is then returned for its commitment in the common parent.

- __Commit atomic execution in parent subnet__: As the parties involved perform the off-chain execution of `OutputState`, they commit it in the `SCA` of the parent subnet. 
    - The commitment is performed by sending a message to the `SubmitAtomicExec` of the `SCA` in the common parent using `SubmitExecParams` as an input. In `SubmitExecParams` users need to include their `LockedState` for the `OutputState` after the execution, and the `CID` of the atomic execution they are submitting.

>     - The `SCA` checks that the `CID` of the `LockedState` matches the one submitted by the other parties, and accepts the submission. The execution will stay in an `ExecInitialized` state until all the parties submit the right `LockedState` as an `OutputState`. When this happens, the execution is marked as `ExecSuccess` and the `SCA` triggers a top-down message to the corresponding subnet to the `Merge` function of the `LockableActor` involved in the execution on every subnet. This will trigger the merge the of the `OutputState` and the unlock of the locked state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The `SCA` checks that the `CID` of the `LockedState` matches the one submitted by the other parties, and accepts the submission. The execution will stay in an `ExecInitialized` state until all the parties submit the right `LockedState` as an `OutputState`. When this happens, the execution is marked as `ExecSuccess` and the `SCA` triggers a top-down message to the corresponding subnet to the `Merge` function of the `LockableActor` involved in the execution on every subnet. This will trigger the merging of the `OutputState` and the unlocking of the locked state.
```

![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/ryr_shptq.png)

> Atomic Execution Protocol data structures
```go
// AtomicExec is the data structure held by SCA for
// atomic executions.
type AtomicExec struct {
	Params    AtomicExecParams
	Submitted map[string]OutputCid
	Status    ExecStatus
}

type SubmitExecParams struct {
	Cid    cid.Cid 
	Abort  bool
	Output atomic.LockedState
}

type SubmitOutput struct {
	Status ExecStatus
}

// AtomicExecParams determines the conditions (input, msgs) for the atomic
// execution.
//
// Parties involved in the protocol use this information to perform their
// off-chain execution stage.
type AtomicExecParams struct {
	Msgs   []types.Message
	Inputs map[cid.Cid]LockedState
}
```

## Collateral and slashing
> WIP. This is just a placeholder for this section. The content included is not final. Follow all design updates [here](https://hackmd.io/HpxNIaacTn2_t6jaDs9RcQ)

> When validators join a subnets, they need to provide enough collateral to have validating rights and in order for the subnet to stake over the `CollateralThreshold` required to activate the subnet. The amount of collateral required needs to be enough to make misbehaviors economically irrational for subnet validators. Collateral works as follows: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When validators join a subnet, they need to provide enough collateral for the subnet to cross the `CollateralThreshold` required to activate the subnet, and to have validating rights of their own. The amount of collateral required needs to be enough to make misbehaviors economically irrational for subnet validators. Collateral works as follows: 
```

> - When a subnet is spawned, subnet founders determine the `gasRate` they want to initially support in their subnet. This parameter determines the "load" the child subnet expects to impose in the parent, and according to it the parent sets the `CollateralThreshold` for the subnet. The collateral is also a metric of the _"skin in the game"_ subnet validators have in the subnet. Subnet validators are allowed to add more collateral than the `CollateralThreshold` to signal users their "trustworthiness". However, the only requirement imposed by HC for a subnet to be `Active` (i.e. with the ability to commit checkpoints and interact with the rest of the network) is for the collateral to be over the `CollateralThreshold`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When a subnet is spawned, subnet founders determine the `gasRate` they want to initially support in their subnet. This parameter determines the "load" the child subnet expects to impose on the parent, and according to it, the parent sets the `CollateralThreshold` for the subnet. The collateral is also a metric of the subnet validators' _"skin in the game"_. Subnet validators are allowed to add more collateral than the `CollateralThreshold` to signal to users their "trustworthiness". However, the only requirement imposed by HC for a subnet to be `Active` (i.e. with the ability to commit checkpoints and interact with the rest of the network) is for the collateral to be over that threshold.
```

- Through the operation of the subnet, the `CollateralThreshold` may change according to the `CurrGasRate` reported by the subnet to the parent (through the commitment of checkpoints), and the `MisbehaviorsLevels`, a measure of the number of successful fault proofs for the child subnet committed in the parent, requiring validators to update their collateral accordingly. 

### Detectable misbehaviors

> In the following table we specify a list of detectable misbehaviors that we envisions users to be able to report through the commitment of fault proofs, along with the `impact` of the attack. This `impact` parameter is used to determine the amount from the collateral slashed due to the reported misbehavior.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following table, we specify a list of detectable misbehaviors that we envision users will be able to report through the commitment of fault proofs, along with the `impact` of the attack. This `impact` parameter is used to determine the amount of collateral slashed due to the reported misbehavior.
```

| Misbehavior         | Impact     | Description | Fault Proof |
|--------------|-----------|------------|------------|
| (R4.1) Agreement equivocation               |1|  Deviation on consensus (votes on consensus, checks PoS-based, etc.) | Block checks |
| (R4.2) Invalid state transition             |2| Consensus reaches valid blocks with an invalid state transition   | State replay  |

> - __Agreement equivocation__: A malicious majority in a subnet can deviate from the consensus algorithm and propagate as valid a block that should have been considered invalid if the protocol was followed successfully. Agreement equivocations may arise, for instance, in blocks that do not pass all block checks (e.g. blocks are not mined in a different epoch, the block does not includes the right ticket, the block is not signed by the right leader, etc.); if the block doesn't include the right votes in a BFT-like consensus, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- __Agreement equivocation__: A malicious majority in a subnet can deviate from the consensus algorithm and propagate a block that should have been considered invalid if the protocol had been followed successfully. Agreement equivocations may arise, for instance, in blocks that do not pass all block checks (e.g. blocks are not mined in a different epoch, the block does not include the right ticket, the block is not signed by the right leader, etc.); if the block doesn't include the right votes in a BFT-like consensus, etc.
```

> To report an agreement equivocation, users need to submit to the parent's SCA the chain of blocks including the equivocated block, and the valid chain replacing the invalid block with a valid one. The SCA perfoms syntactic checks over the inputs and runs the `equivocation_check` function in the corresponding actor of the subnet actor to perform deeper consensus-specific checks. If any of these checks fail, the collateral of the subnet is slashed. The function `equivocation_check` is a mandatory function in the subent actor interface that implements all the consensus-specific checks required to detect agreement equivocations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To report an agreement equivocation, users need to submit to the parent's SCA the chain of blocks that includes the equivocated block and the valid chain that replaces the invalid block with a valid one. The SCA performs syntactic checks over the inputs and runs the `equivocation_check` function in the corresponding actor of the subnet actor to perform deeper consensus-specific checks. If any of these checks fail, the collateral of the subnet is slashed. The function `equivocation_check` is a mandatory function in the subnet actor interface, and it implements all the consensus-specific checks required to detect agreement equivocations.
```

> Thus, if an agreement equivocation is detected in epoch `n`, a user looking to report the misbehavior needs to report the chain of the latest `n-finality` including the equivocated block, and the valid chain of `n-finality` blocks to the parent SCA. For BFT-like protocols, it may suffice to report the latest block where the equivocation arises, while for sync protocols like Nakamoto consensus --without a clear metric of finality and where long-lasting forks may appear-- reporting agreement equivocations may be impossible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thus, if an agreement equivocation is detected in epoch `n`, a user looking to report the misbehavior needs to report the chain of the latest `n-finality` including the equivocated block and the valid chain of `n-finality` blocks to the parent SCA. For BFT-like protocols, it may suffice to report the latest block where the equivocation arises, while for sync protocols like Nakamoto consensus -- without a clear metric of finality and where long-lasting forks may appear -- reporting agreement equivocations may be impossible.
```

> > Note: The use of Lurk proofs as native primitives in subnets' consensus can simplify and generalize the reporting and detection of agreement equivocations (to the extent of, potentially, completely removing them)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Note: The use of [Lurk](https://github.com/lurk-lang) proofs as native primitives in subnets' consensus can simplify and generalize the reporting and detection of agreement equivocations (to the extent of, potentially, completely removing them)
```

> - __Invalid state transition__: Any malicious majority of a subnet can also push invalid state transitions in a valid block. Malicious validators can include messages in a valid block that trigger unallowed state changes. Invalid state transitions are a general misbehavior that may impact HC-specific proccesses like the commitment of checkpoints, or the result of atomic executions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- __Invalid state transition__: Any malicious majority of a subnet can also push invalid state transitions in a valid block. Malicious validators can include messages in a valid block that trigger unallowed state changes. Invalid state transitions are a general misbehavior that may impact HC-specific processes like the commitment of checkpoints or the result of atomic executions.
```

> In order to report an invalid state transition in a subnet, users need to submit to the parent SCA the chain of blocks from the closest valid committed checkpoint to the misbehavior, to the block where the invalid state transition happens. The parent SCA replays every state change in the reported chain and verifies that, indeed, an invalid state transition happened in the reported block. If the misbehaviors is reported successfully, the collateral for the subnet is correspondingly slashed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to report an invalid state transition in a subnet, users need to submit to the parent SCA the chain of blocks from the closest valid committed checkpoint to the block where the invalid state transition happens. The parent SCA replays every state change in the reported chain and verifies that, indeed, an invalid state transition happened in the reported block. If the misbehavior is reported successfully, the collateral for the subnet is correspondingly slashed.
```

Thus, if an invalid state transition happens at block `n`, and the latest committed checkpoint was at block `n-x`, a user looking to report the misbheavior needes to submit to the SCA of the parent the chain of `x` blocks from `n-x` to `n` so the state can be replayed and the invalid state transition checked.
>Note: Along with the checkpoint at `n-x` a snapshot of the state at `n-x` may also need to be provided to enable the whole state of the subnet (for every contract) to be replayed.

## Cross-net routing gas price
> WIP. This is just a placeholder for this section. The content included is not final. Follow all design updates [here](https://hackmd.io/HpxNIaacTn2_t6jaDs9RcQ)

> Cross-net messages from a source subnet, `sn_src`, to some other subnet in the hierarchy,`sn_dest`, need to be provided with enough gas for the message to be executed and routeed successfully by every subnet in the path `Path(sn_src, sn_dest)`. Cross-net messages within a subnet are treated as any other message, their execution triggers some state chain that costs certain amoun of gas in the subnet, `gas_cost_sn`. The main difference for cross-net message is that this execution and state change may translate into the propagation of the message to the next subnet in the path. However, for a user to be able to provide the message with enough gas, it needs to have a sense of the cost of execution in each subnet in the path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cross-net messages from a source subnet, `sn_src`, to some other subnet in the hierarchy,`sn_dest`, need to be provided with enough gas for the message to be executed and routed successfully by every subnet in the path `Path(sn_src, sn_dest)`. Cross-net messages within a subnet are treated like any other message, and their execution triggers some state change that costs a certain amount of gas in the subnet, `gas_cost_sn`. The main difference for cross-net messages is that this execution and state change may translate into the propagation of the message to the next subnet in the path. However, for a user to be able to provide the message with enough gas, it needs to have a sense of the cost of execution in each subnet in the path.
```

> To improve the UX and make as predictable as possible this gas estimation, I propose for subnet to publish basic parameters of their gas model when they are spawn: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To improve the UX and make cross-net gas costs more predictable, each subnet publishes basic parameters of their gas model at spawning time: 
```

> - `gas_model_type` (if based in miner tipping, EIP1559-like, etc.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `gas_model_type` (if based on miner tipping, EIP1559-like, etc.)
```

- `curr_base_fee` (if any)
- etc.

> With this information, cross-net message will include an array of `gas_limit` amount that the message wants to dedicate to each subnet in the hop. Subnets in the path won't be able to charge over the specified `gas_limit` for the subnet. When a cross-net reaches a subnet for which `gas_limit` is insufficient, it fails and an error message and the outstanding gas is propagated back to the source.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With this information, cross-net message will include an array of `gas_limit` amounts that the message is willing to allocate to each subnet in the hop. Subnets in the path won't be able to charge over the specified `gas_limit` for the subnet. When a cross-net reaches a subnet for which `gas_limit` is insufficient, it fails and an error message is propagated back to the source, along with the unspent gas.
```

> If a subnet wants to change the parameters of its gas model, it'll need to spawn a new subnet and migrate their traffic there. This prevents subnets from being able to manipulate their gas model and charge different gas costs from the ones publically advertised and harming messages (e.g. forcing gas messages to run out of gas). Ideally, these public gas model parameters used to predict the total gas of a message as a cross-net message traverse a subnet can be extracted from the general crypto-econ model CEL is working on for rootnets (and that will be extrapolated as a configurable general model for subnets).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a subnet wants to change the parameters of its gas model, it'll need to spawn a new subnet and migrate its traffic there. This prevents subnets from being able to manipulate their gas model and charge different gas costs from the ones publically advertised and harming message flow (e.g. forcing gas messages to run out of gas). Ideally, these public gas model parameters used to predict the total gas of a message as a cross-net message traverse a subnet can be extracted from the general crypto-econ model CEL is working on for the root network (and that will be extrapolated as a configurable general model for subnets).
```

### Glossary
For clarity, we include here a glossary of HC-related concepts used throughout the spec:
- __Subnet__: Hierarchical consensus sidechain that keeps its own independent state, consensus algorithm, message pool, and broadcast layer, but that is able to seamlessly interact and communciate with other subnets in the hierarchy.
- __Rootnet__: First network from which all new subnets are spawned and the hierarchy is built. In our case, the Filecoin mainnet.
- __Parent Subnet__: Network from which a new subnet (child) is spawned. The parent is the anchor of trust in the hierarchy for all of its children.
- __Peer/Node of a subnet__: A full-node participating in a specific subnet (i.e. a member of the subnet syncing its full state).
- __User/Client__: Light-node of a subnet (i.e. participant not necessarily syncing the full state of the subnet).
- __Native Token__: Token of the rootnet used for the interaction with the HC protocol. In our case, `FIL`.
- __Circulating Supply__: Amount of native tokens injected for their use in a subnet.
- __Cross-net messages__: Messages originated in a subnet and directed to some other subnet in the hierarchy.

> - __Collateral__: Amount of native tokens staked in a subnet's parent by subnet's validators. This stake is slashed when a misbehavior in the subnet is detected and successfully reported to the parent.

Author: Good catch, we should add it to the glossary.

## Architecture
The system starts with a _rootnet_ which, at first, keeps the entire state and processes all the transaction in the system (like present-day Filecoin). Any subset of users of the rootnet can spawn a new subnet from it.

> High-level architecture of hierarchical consensus
![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/BJVIhk8Fc.png)

This subnet instantiates a new network with its own state, independent from the root network, replicated among the subset of participants of the overall system who are members of the subnet. From this point on, the new subnet processes transactions involving the state in the subnet independently of the root chain. Further subnets can then be spawned from any point in the hierarchy. 

From the perspective of a peer in the network, spawning or syncing with a new subnet starts a set of new processes to handle the independent state, mempool, and the specific [GossipSub](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/pubsub/gossipsub/gossipsub-v1.1.md) topic to broadcast and receive subnet-specific messages.

> Stack of an HC node
![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/BJla0JLYq.png)

> Subnets are able to interact with the state of other subnets (and that of the rootnet) through _[cross-subnet](#Cross-net-messages "Cross-net messages")_ (or, simply,  _cross-net_) messages. __Full-nodes and validators in a given subnet need trusted access to the state of its parent subnet.__ We implement this by having them synchronise the chain of the parent subnet (i.e. child subnet full-nodes also run full nodes on the parent subnet). 

Author: Yes, we shouldn't have hyphens. I'll do a "replace-all".

    // source wants to stake to become part of the subne.
    // It triggers all check to determine if the source is eligible
    // to become part of the subnet, and must propagate an `AddCollateral` message
    // to the SCA to trigger the registration.
    // 
    // Join is also responsible to send a `Register` message to the SCA
    // whenever the `CollateralThreshold` is reached. This function can also
    // be used to AddCollateral for the subnet in the SCA. Additional
    // checks for this operation may be included. As a result of the
    // execution an `AddCollateral` message must be sent to the SCA 
    // including the added collateral.
    // (methodNum = 2)
    Join()
    
    // Called by participants that want to leave the subnet. It triggers all
    // the checks to see if the source is eligible to leave the subnet.
    // This function must propagate a `ReleaseCollateral` message to the SCA.
    // The SCA will then release the corresponding stake of the validator in
    // a message to the subnet actor so the subnet actor can trigger a message
    // returning the funds to the leaving validtor.
    // (methodNum = 3)
    Leave()
    

>     // Kill performs all the sanity-checks required before completely

Reviewer 2: It might be helpful giving an example of what kind of checks the reference implementation does, like there are in the `Checkpoint` method.

    // to commit the checkpoint.
    // (methodNum = 5)
    SubmitCheckpoint(Checkpoint)
    
    // CheckEquivocation is called by the SCA to perform consensus-specific
    // checks when an agreement equivocation is reported. It receives as input
    // the chain of the last `finality_delay` blocks including the invalid
    // blocks and the chain with what is supposed to be the valid block.
    // (methodNum = 6)
    CheckEquivocation(invalid []Block, valid []Block)
}
```
##### SubnetActor State
> Example of state of the subnet actor from the reference implementation.
```go
type SubnetState struct {
    // Human-readable name of the subnet.
    Name string
    // ID of the parent subnet
    ParentID address.SubnetID
    // Type of Consensus algorithm.
    Consensus hierarchical.ConsensusType
    // Minimum stake required for an address to join the subnet
    // as a miner
    MinMinerStake abi.TokenAmount
    // List of miners in the subnet.
    // NOTE: Consider using AMT.
    Miners []address.Address
    // Total collateral currently deposited in the
    TotalStake abi.TokenAmount
    // BalanceTable with the distribution of stake by address

>     Stake cid.Cid // HAMT[tokenAmount]address

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Stake cid.Cid // HAMT[address]tokenAmount
```

    // State of the subnet (Active, Inactive, Terminating)
    Status Status
    // Genesis bootstrap for the subnet. This is created
    // when the subnet is generated.
    Genesis []byte
    // Checkpointing period. Number of epochs between checkpoint commitments
    CheckPeriod abi.ChainEpoch
    // Checkpoints submit to SubnetActor per epoch
    Checkpoints cid.Cid // HAMT[epoch]Checkpoint
    // CheckpointVotes includes the validator votes for the checkpoint

>     // of the current window.

Author: Agree! In many of these cases I forgot to edit the comments from the code (thus the field name repetition, Go's convention for public fields). I'll review all of them.

    CheckpointVotes cid.Cid // HAMT[cid]CheckVotes
    // ValidatorSet is a set of validators

>     ValidatorSet []hierarchical.Validator

Author: Definitely hahaha will fix it, thanks!

    MinValidators uint64
}
```
##### Constructor Parameters
> Constructor Parameters for reference implementation of subnet actor.
```go
type ConstructParams struct {
    // ID of the current network
    NetworkName     address.SubnetID      
    // Human-readable name for the subnet
    Name            address.SubnetID  
    // Consensus implemented in the subnet
    Consensus hierarchical.ConsensusType
    // Arbitrary consensus parameters required to initialize
    // the consensus protocol (e.g. minimum number of validators).
    // These parameters are consensus-specific.
    ConsensusParams *hierarchical.ConsensusParams
    // Minimum amount of stake required from participant 
    // to become a validator of the subnet.
    MinValidatorStake   abi.TokenAmount
    // Checkpointing period used in the subnet. It determines
    // how often the subnet propagates and commits checkpoints in its
    // parent
    CheckPeriod     abi.ChainEpoch
}
```
> TODO: There is an on-going revision of `ConstructParams` to include a way to provide arbitrary input arguments to a subnet.

## Subnet Coordinator Actor (SCA)

> The main entity responsible for handling all the lifecycle of child subnets in a specific chain is the Subnet Coordinator Actor (`SCA`). The `SCA` is a builtin-actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This actor includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. It also enforces all the security requirements, fund management, and cryptoeconomics of the hierarchical consensus, as Subnet Actors are user-defined and can't be (fully) trusted. The `SCA` has a reserved address ID `f064`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The main entity responsible for handling all the lifecycle of child subnets in a specific chain is the subnet coordinator actor (`SCA`). The `SCA` is a built-in actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This actor includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. It also enforces all the security requirements, fund management, and cryptoeconomics of hierarchical consensus, as subnet actors are user-defined and can't be (fully) trusted. The `SCA` has a reserved address ID `f064`.
```

> The MVP implementation of this builtin-actor can be found [here](https://github.com/adlrocha/builtin-actors/tree/master/actors/hierarchical_sca). The `SCA` exposes the following functions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The MVP implementation of this built-in actor can be found [here](https://github.com/adlrocha/builtin-actors/tree/master/actors/hierarchical_sca). The `SCA` exposes the following functions:
```

##### SCA Functions
> Functions of the SCA. These functions are triggered when a `message` is sent for their corresponding `methodNum`.
```go
type SCA interface{
    // Initializes the state of the SCA and sets
    // all its initial parameters.
    // (methodNum = 1)
    Constructor(ConstructParams)
    
    // Register expects as source the address of the subnet actor of

>     // the subnet that wants to be registered. Its
>     // `value` an amount of collateral over the `CollateralThreshold`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // the subnet that wants to be registered. The message's `value` 
    // is the subnet's collateral and must exceed the `CollateralThreshold`.
```
The "its value" part is a bit unclear

>     // This functions activates the subnet and from there on other

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // This functions activates the subnet. From then on, other
```

    // subnets in the system are allowed to interact with it and the
    // subnet can start commtting its checkpoints.
    // (methodNum = 2)
    Register()
    
    // AddCollateral expects as source the address of the subnet actor
    // for which the collateral wants to be added.  Its `value` should
    // include the amount of collateral to be added for the subnet.
    // (methodNum = 3)
    AddCollateral()
    
    // ReleaseCollateral expects as source the address of the subnet actor
    // for which the collateral should be released. It triggers a message

>     // to the subnet actor returning the corresponding collateral. 

Reviewer 2: Do we know which message? Or is this just some "transfer" type? In the other direction it says specifically what type of message is sent, that's why I'm asking.

Author: Yes, it's a transfer message. Adding a clarification.

    // (methodNum = 4)
    ReleaseCollateral(value abi.TokenAmount)
    
    // Kill expects as source the address of the subnet actor to be killed.
    // This function can only be executed if no collateral or circulating

>     // supply is left for the subnet (i.e. balance = 0).

Reviewer 2: Curious: this check has not been mentioned in the subnet actor interface, it just says "sanity checks". From what I saw, first there's the actor state transition in a `transaction`, and then there's the `send`. What if somebody implements an actor which doesn't adhere to this rule, kills their subnet actor, and then sends the message to the SCA, but the SCA refuses to kill it?

Author: Great question. If I am not mistaken, in the current implementation of the VM side-effects are atomic, meaning that when `Kill()` is called in the subnet actor, the set of checks are run, and if they pass a side-effect message is sent to `SCA::Kill`. If the latter fails, the whole message will fail, so there's no way for the subnet actor kill to succeed without the SCA Kill succeeding. 

That being said, I don't know if this will change for FVM-M2 (I'll try to find where this is being discussed). I agree that if this is the case we'll need to be careful and revisit how we kill subnets.

Reviewer 2: Interesting. Yeah the semantics seem to be left the the actor coder, because `Runtime` is way too powerful. It is handed to the actor as-is, and you are expected to use `transaction` and not call `send` while doing so. But you are not forced to do so - you can retrieve your state with `runtime.state()`, do your thing and use `send`, then use `transaction` only to set the state to the value you updated earlier. 

I agree that it probably won't commit if send fails, but I also didn't understand what `send` does, whether it executes immediately, or just lines up a message to be done later. Looked like the latter. 

I suppose using transactions and not sending messages in the middle prevents some reentrancy bugs, but because it's not enforced and it looks like you have to have discipline to stick to it and code it right, it would be good to hear the full story of where this is heading.

    // (methodNum = 5)
    Kill()
    

>     // Kill expects as source the address of the subnet actor for which the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // CommitChildCheckpoint expects as source the address of the subnet actor for which the
```

May exceed column limit

    // checkpoint is being committed. The function performs some basic checks
    // to ensure that checkpoint is valid and it persist it in the SCA state.
    // (methodNum = 6)
    CommitChildCheckpoint(ch Checkpoint)
    
    // Fund can be called by any user in a subnet and it injects 
    // the `value` of native tokens included in the message to the source's address in
    // the child subnet given as argument.
    // (methodNum = 7)
    Fund(address.SubnetID)
    
    // Release can be called by any user in a subnet to release the amount 
    // of native tokens included in `value` from its own address in the
    // subnet to the address in the parent. 
    // (methodNum = 8)

>     Release()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Release(address.SubnetID)
```
I figure if you need to say to which subnet you want to send tokens in `Fund`, you also have to say which subnet you want to take away from. 

Could `Fund` and `Release` be moved to the `SubnetActor` interface?

Reviewer 3: I don't think that's right: the fund message is sent from an address on the parent, so it needs to specify the subnet to fund. The release message is sent from the address on the subnet, so you can deduce the subnet id.

Author: @jsoares is correct. This functions release an amount of native tokens to your own address in the immediate parent, so there's no need to specify the destination explicitly.

    
    // SendCross can be called by any user in the subnet to send 
    // an arbitrary cross-message to any other subnet in
    // the hierarchy.
    // (methodNum = 9)

>     SendCross(msg CrossMsgParams)

Reviewer 2: How does the SCA know which users are in the subnet? 
Could this method be moved into the Subnet Actor? 

Don't cross messages arrive at the SCA as part of checkpoints, which are submitted by the SA to the SCA?

Reviewer 2: Oh, I thought about it wrong, I thought this is the SCA of the _parent_ net, and the subnet is represented by one of the subnet actors. Not that it's the SCA running _in_ the subnet node, where the users have their balances.

Author: Yes! `SendCross()` is used as the "gateway" of the subnet to the rest of the hierarchy, so you need funds in that subnet to initiate the cross-net message.

    
    // ApplyMessage can only be called as an `ImplicitMessage` by
    // the `SystemActor` and is used to perform the execution of a 

>     // of cross-net messages in the subnet. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe it would be worth explaining what is supposed to happen in a bit more detail.

Author: Yes! Added an extended description of the method.

    // (methodNum = 10)
    ApplyMessage(msg CrossMsgParams)
    
    // InitAtomicExec can be called by users to initiate an
    // atomic execution with some other subnet.
    // (methodNum = 11)
    InitAtomicExec(params AtomicExecParams)
    
    // SubmitAtomicExec has to be called by all participants in an
    // atomic execution to submit their results and trigger the 
    // propagation of the output (or the abortion) of the execution
    // to the corresponding subnets.
    // (methodNum = 12)
    SubmitAtomicExec(submit SubmitExecParams)
    
    // WIP: Not implemented yet.
    // (methodNum = 13)
    ReportMisbehavior()
    
    // WIP: Not implemented yet.
    // (methodNum = 14)

>     Save()

Reviewer 3: Should we specify the interface anyway? That's usually how things are supposed to go 😄

Author: Yes! Again, I left it as homework for "future-me" and completely missed it. I will add a proposal (even if we end up changing it). Thanks!

```

> All function parameters from the above snippet of code are fully specified in the detailed description of the different protocols.

##### SCA State
> State of the SCA
```go
type SCAState struct {
    // ID of the current network
    NetworkName address.SubnetID

>     // Total of active subnets spawwned from this one

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Number of active subnets spawned from this one
```

Reviewer 3: I also wonder if the field should include "active"; "total" can be misinterpreted.

    TotalSubnets uint64
    // Minimum stake required to create a new subnet
    CollateralThreshold abi.TokenAmount
    // List of subnets
    Subnets cid.Cid // HAMT[cid.Cid]Subnet
    // Checkpoint period in number of epochs for the subnet
    CheckPeriod abi.ChainEpoch
    // Checkpoints committed in SCA
    Checkpoints cid.Cid // HAMT[epoch]Checkpoint
    // CheckMsgMetaRegistry
    // Stores information about the list of messages and child msgMetas being
    // propagated in checkpoints to the top of the hierarchy.

>     CheckMsgsRegistry cid.Cid // HAMT[cid]CrossMsgs

Reviewer 2: Just looking at this state and the SCA interface, it is not clear to me when this registry gets cleared of messages that have been applied, if ever. I suppose when `AppliedBottomUpNonce` gets adjusted, which is hopefully explained under checkpointing (I have to read that again) but just saying that the interface doesn't reflect this to me.

Reviewer 2: Oh I see from the code that it's `ApplyMsg`. And that some kind of replacement is happening in the registry.

    // Latest nonce of a cross message sent from subnet.
    Nonce             uint64  

>     // BottomUpNonce of bottomup messages for msgMeta received from che    kpoints.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Nonce of bottom-up messages for msgMeta received from checkpoints.
```

Reviewer 3: > bottom-up messages for msgMeta

I still find that "for" a bit ambiguous

Author: "assigned to"? I'll do a full pass after and see if I can improve it.

    // This nonce is used to mark with a nonce the metadata about cross-net
    // messages received in checkpoints. This is used to order the

>     // bottom-up cross-messages received through checkpoints.

Reviewer 3: We're about 50% split between cross[-]messages and cross-net messages. Maybe pick one?

    Status     Status
    // Latest checkpoint committed for the subnet.
    // Kept for verification purposes.
    PrevCheckpoint schema.Checkpoint
}
```

## Consensus Interface
Each subnet can run its own implementation of a consensus algorithm. In order for different consensus implementations to operate semlessly with the Filecoin stack, we decouple the core methods of the current consensus in its own interace. In order for a consensus implementation to be usuable in a subnet it needs to implement this interface.
> Consensus Interface
```go
type Consensus interface {
    // Performs a complete check of a proposed block to either
    // accept it or reject it.
    ValidateBlock(ctx context.Context, b *types.FullBlock) (err error)
    // Light check performed when a block is received through 
    // the pubsub channel.
    ValidateBlockPubsub(ctx context.Context, self bool, msg *pubsub.Message) (pubsub.ValidationResult, string)

    // Used by mining processes to assemble and propose a new
    // signed block.
    CreateBlock(ctx context.Context, w api.Wallet, bt *api.BlockTemplate) (*types.FullBlock, error)
    // Return the type of consensus. 

>     Type() hierarchical.ConsensusType

Reviewer 2: I would try to remove this from the interface. The consensus should be described by its methods, it should not have to be known by an ID for the host system, ideally, or if it does, we should elaborate on what those are and why this is important. 

As I understand the `SubnetActor` should be the only one that understands how to validate a `Checkpoint` that comes from this consensus. If the correct subnet actor has been registered for a subnet, it should not need a type. 

Now, perhaps the reference implementation of the actor does need a type, because it can handle multiple ones, but in that case the IDs it an handle should be specific to the reference subnet actor, just an example, and not be part of the common `hierarchical` namespace. 

I think this is how it works in Rust, although not in Go. I'm just saying so the spec isn't misleading people into thinking this is a common type they can't extend without buy-in from the whole community.

Reviewer 3: I think I understand your point (you shouldn't need a IANA-style central registry for protocol IDs) but not necessarily your solution. Since the protocols tie into a local (i.e. ex-actor) implementation, how do nodes match the right subnet protocol? Maybe use some UUID-like probabilistically unique ID?

Reviewer 2: I thought that we run:
1. A different node software that implements SuperDuperConsensus in the child subnets. It only communicates with the parent subnet nodes via libp2p gossipsub topics. Nobody knows what SuperDuperConsensus is.
2. Except that the validators deploy an SA actor code into the parent subnet. This actor conforms to the expected SA interface in terms of message handling, but it can also receive SuperDuperCheckpoints and knows how to verify them and send them on to the SCA of the parent subnet.

Author: You are totally right, actually we used a similar approach to 1. to integrate Tendermint in the MVP. That being said, we want to ship the node with a built-in catalogue of basic consensus implementations (to lower the barriers for users to join/spawn their subnets), but we should definitely support the approach you suggest.

}
```
An example of a BFT-like consensus protocol being integrated in HC through this consensus interface can be found [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/mir)

> TODO: Add a section describing how to integrate new consensus algorithms into HC.

## Lifecycle of a subnet
The following section presents an overview of the lifecycle of a subnet.

### Spawning and joining a subnet
Creating a new subnet instantiates a new independent state with all its subnet-specific requirements to operate independently. This includes, in particular: a new pubsub topic that peers use as the transport layer to exchange subnet-specific messages, a new mempool instance, a new instance of the Virtual Machine (VM), as well as any other additional module required by the consensus that the subnet is running (builtin-actors, mining resources, etc.). 

> To spawn a new subnet, peers need to deploy a new `SubnetActor` that implements the core logic for the governance of the new subnet. The contract specifies the consensus protocol to be run by the subnet and the set of policies to be enforced for new members, leaving members, checkpointing, killing the subnet, etc. For a new subnet to interact with the rest of the hierarchy, it needs to be registered in the `SCA` of the parent chain. The `SCA` is a system actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This smart contract includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. And, as `SA`s are user-defined and untrusted, it also enforces security requirements, fund management and the cryptoeconomics of hierarchical consensus.

Author: Agree! Do you think that the description in `SubnetActor` and `SCA` are enough to understand the lifecycle of a subnet? Initially, I didn't include this section, but I was afraid that with all the methods and data structures, the high-level description would be lost. I appreciate any suggestion on how to improve this :)

> To spawn a new subnet, peers need to deploy a new `SubnetActor` that implements the core logic for the governance of the new subnet. The contract specifies the consensus protocol to be run by the subnet and the set of policies to be enforced for new members, leaving members, checkpointing, killing the subnet, etc. For a new subnet to interact with the rest of the hierarchy, it needs to be registered in the `SCA` of the parent chain. The `SCA` is a system actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This smart contract includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. And, as `SA`s are user-defined and untrusted, it also enforces security requirements, fund management and the cryptoeconomics of hierarchical consensus.

Reviewer 2: I found that on first read I found it easy enough to follow, but when I take a closer look I'm struggling a bit because:
* Data structures are mentioned in the interfaces, but only introduced much later when the text explains what they are about
* Interfaces have comments for methods about things like who can call them, but not what they do in detail - that comes later in prose, where the method is also just part of the text, so I have to search
* The raw Cid in the data structures doesn't tell much without comment, I have to find the field mentioned in the text
* I get confused by the parent vs child context when we just say "SCA"

This is obviously a huge spec and a lot of effort went into it, but it feels a little bit like a "report" of what has been done, rather than a spec of how someone should implement it from scratch. Examples of this are things that are mentioned in parentheses as "(after that other thing happens)".

Perhaps another option would be to:
1. Introduce the actor state first with all the supporting data structures, use as much typing annotation as possible
2. Introduce the methods/messages the actors can handle, systematically explaining things like
  * who can call them
  * what other preconditions apply
  * which parts of the state they touch and how do they change it
  * what are their invariants, if any
  * what messages they send to other actors

That way I should be able to look up an operation and compare it to the code, rather than rediscover where things are explained. 

The diagrams help a lot. I found https://plantuml.com/sequence-diagram to be great in this regard: we can check in their source and comment on individual lines, and keep it in sync with the spec. We could have similar ones depicting the parent and child subnets side by side, with messages going back and forth.

> To spawn a new subnet, peers need to deploy a new `SubnetActor` that implements the core logic for the governance of the new subnet. The contract specifies the consensus protocol to be run by the subnet and the set of policies to be enforced for new members, leaving members, checkpointing, killing the subnet, etc. For a new subnet to interact with the rest of the hierarchy, it needs to be registered in the `SCA` of the parent chain. The `SCA` is a system actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This smart contract includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. And, as `SA`s are user-defined and untrusted, it also enforces security requirements, fund management and the cryptoeconomics of hierarchical consensus.

Author: Noted. I'll address all outstanding comments and do another pass to adapt to this approach, I like it.

> To spawn a new subnet, peers need to deploy a new `SubnetActor` that implements the core logic for the governance of the new subnet. The contract specifies the consensus protocol to be run by the subnet and the set of policies to be enforced for new members, leaving members, checkpointing, killing the subnet, etc. For a new subnet to interact with the rest of the hierarchy, it needs to be registered in the `SCA` of the parent chain. The `SCA` is a system actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This smart contract includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. And, as `SA`s are user-defined and untrusted, it also enforces security requirements, fund management and the cryptoeconomics of hierarchical consensus.

Author: Full pass with this in mind done. Resolving the comment but feel free to add any concerns you may have.

### Leaving and killing a subnet
Members of a subnet can leave the subnet at any point by sending a message to the subnet's `SA` in the parent chain. If the miner fulfills the requirements to leave the subnet defined in the subnet's `SA` when it was deployed, a message to the `SCA` is triggered by the `SA` to release the miner's collateral.  If a validator leaving the subnet brings the collateral of the subnet below `CollateralThreshold`, the subnet gets in an `Inactive` state, and it can no longer interact with the rest of chains in the hierarchy or checkpoint to the top chain. To recover its `Active` state, any participant of the protocol (within or outside the subnet, user or validator) need to put up additional collateral.

> Validators of a subnet can also kill a subnet by sending a `ReleaseCollateral()` message to the `SA`. Similar to the previous situation, the `SA` sends a message to the `SCA` to release all the collateral for the subnet if all the requirements to kill the subnet are fulfilled.

Reviewer 2: The `ReleaseCollateral` message appears in the SCA interface, not the SA, and it takes an amount to be released. Is it really meant to kill the subnet? I thought it might deactivate it, but the SA will have to receive the `Kill` message.

```go
type SubnetID struct {
    // string representation of the parent SubnetID
    Parent string 
    // Address of the subnet actor governing the operation
    // of the subnet in the parent.
    // (it must be a an ID address)
    Actor address.Address
}
```

`SubnetID` includes the following convenience methods to aid in the use of `SubnetID`s.
> SubnetID methods
```go
// Returns the parent of the current SubnetID
Parent() SubnetID
// Returns the address of the Subnet actor for the Subnet
Actor() address.Address
// Returns the string representation of the SubnetID
String() string
// Returns the serialized representation of the SubnetID
Bytes() []byte
// Returns the in-memory representation (struct) of the SubnetID
// from its string representation. It errors if the string
// representation is not a valid SubnetID.
FromString(string) (SubnetID, error)
// Returns the common parent of the current subnet and the one
// given as an argument.

> CommonParent(subnet.ID) Subnet.ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CommonParent(SubnetID) SubnetID
```

> // Returns the next subnet down in the hierarchy in the path given in 
> // the current SubnetID from the one given as an argument. It errors
> // if there is not way to go down the path from the given argument.
> // 
> // Example: 
> // `/root/f0100/f0200`.Down(`/root`) = `/root/f0100`
> Down(subnetID) (SubnetID, error)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Returns the next subnet down in the hierarchy in the path of the 
// receiving SubnetID, starting from the prefix given as an argument. 
// It errors if there is no such path leading down.
// 
// Example: 
// `/root/f0100/f0200`.Down(`/root`) = `/root/f0100`
Down(SubnetID) (SubnetID, error)
```

> // Returns the next subnet up in the hierarchy in the path given in 
> // the current SubnetID from the one given as an argument. It errors
> // if there is not way to go up the path from the given argument.
> // 
> // Example: 
> // `/root/f0100/f0200`.Up(`/root/f0100`) = `/root`
> Up(subnetID) (SubnetID, error)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Returns the next subnet up in the hierarchy in the path of the 
// receiving SubnetID, starting from the prefix given as an argument. 
// It errors if there is no such path leading up.
// 
// Example: 
// `/root/f0100/f0200`.Up(`/root/f0100`) = `/root`
Up(SubnetID) (SubnetID, error)
```

```

## Hierarchical Address
HC uses [Filecoin addresses](https://spec.filecoin.io/#section-appendix.address) for its operation. In order to deduplicate addresses from different subnets, HC introduces a new address protocol with ID `4` called _hierarchical address (HA)_. A hierarchical address is just a raw Filecoin address with additional information about the subnet ID the address refers to. 

There are 2 ways a Filecoin address can be represented. An address appearing on chain will always be formatted as raw bytes. An address may also be encoded to a string, this encoding includes a checksum and network prefix. An address encoded as a string will never appear on chain, this format is used for sharing among humans. A hierarchical address has the same structure of a plain Filecoin address. In this case, the payload of hierarchical addresses don't have a fixed size, and their size depend on the length of the `SubnetID` and the raw address used. Thus, the payload of a hierarchical address has the following structure:

> - __Subnet Size (1 byte)__: Represents the number of bytes of the `SubnetID` included the address as a `varInt`. It is used to delimit the bytes of the payload of the `SubnetID` with those of the raw address. Due to the maximum size of `SubnetID` the `varInt` will never use more than 1 byte. 

Author: Perfect rephrasing. Thanks!

Checkpoints need to be signed by miners of a child chain and committed to the parent chain through their corresponding `SA`. The specific signature policy is defined in the `SA` and determines the type and minimum number of signatures required for a checkpoint to be accepted and validated by the `SA` for its propagation to the top chain. Different signature schemes may be used here, including multi-signatures or threshold signatures among subnet miners. For instance, in the reference implementation of `SA`, the actor waits for more than `2/3` of the validators in the subnet to send the valid checkpoint signed before propagating it to the `SCA` for commitment. Alternative verification policies for a subnet can be implemented in the `SubmitCheckpoint()` function of the subnet actor interface. 

> In order for a new checkpoint to be accepted for commitment in `SCA`, the source of the message `CommitChildCheckpoint()` needs to be the address of the subnet actor of the corresponding subnet; the subnet needs to be in an `Active` state (i.e. its collateral is over `CollateralThreshold`); the epoch of the checkpoint should be a multiple of `CheckPeriod` and larger that that of the previous checkpoint; and the checkpoint must point to the `CID` of the previous checkpoint committed by the subnet. 

Reviewer 2: > In order for a new checkpoint to be accepted for commitment in `SCA` ... the epoch of the checkpoint should be a multiple of `CheckPeriod` and larger that that of the previous checkpoint;

I found this to be a bit confusing. It sounds SCA here is the one in the parent subnet, and it's just received a checkpoint created by the child SCA in the child subnet, submitted through the SA that lives in the parent subnet. 

Now, I understand that the SCA in the child subnet creates checkpoints at each `CheckPeriod`, but I don't see the check period of the child being tracked by the parent, e.g. it's not part of the `Subnet` struct. 

Surely we don't expect all child checkpoints to come at the period of the parent, as that would contradict the next sentence, which states that they can set it according to the needs of their consensus algorithms. 

So, it sounds to me that if the SA is happy with the checkpoint, the SCA should accept it (if the subnet is active and the checkpoint points at the previous one).

Author: > So, it sounds to me that if the SA is happy with the checkpoint, the SCA should accept it (if the subnet is active and the checkpoint points at the previous one).

That is correct. The SCA does some basic semantic validations at this point (with access to the subnet state there's not much we can do). Let's see if we can start exploring Lurk soon, as that would improve this flow a lot.

When spawned, subnets are allowed to configure the `CheckPeriod` that better suits their needs and the specifics of its consensus algorithm.

### Checkpoint Commitment

> As an example, lets consider a checkpoint for subnet `/root/f0100/f0200`. Every `CheckPeriod` (in terms of subnet block time), validators access the checkpoint template that needs to be signed and populated by calling the `CheckpointTemplate()` state accesor from `SCA` in `/root/f0100/f0200`. Once signed and populated, checkpoints from `/root/f0100/f0200` are submitted to the `SA` with ID `f0200` of the subnet network `/root/f0100` by sending a message to `SubmitCheckpoint()`. After performing the corresponding checks and waiting for the commitment conditions (i.e. `2/3` of the validators sending a signed checkpoint in its reference implementation), this actor then triggers a message to `/root/f0100` `SCA`'s `CommitChildCheckpoint()` function to commit the checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, lets consider a checkpoint for subnet `/root/f0100/f0200`. Every `CheckPeriod` (in terms of subnet block time), validators access the checkpoint template that needs to be signed and populated by calling the `CheckpointTemplate()` state accesor from `SCA` in `/root/f0100/f0200`. Once signed and populated, checkpoints from `/root/f0100/f0200` are submitted to the `SA` with ID `f0200` of the subnet network `/root/f0100` by sending a message to `SubmitCheckpoint()`. After performing the corresponding checks and waiting for the commitment conditions (i.e. `+2/3` of the validators sending a signed checkpoint in its reference implementation), this actor then triggers a message to `/root/f0100` `SCA`'s `CommitChildCheckpoint()` function to commit the checkpoint.
```

When the checkpoint is committed, `SCA` in `/root/f0100` is responsible for aggregating the checkpoint from `/root/f0100/f0200` with those of other children of `/root/f0100`, and for generating a new checkpoint for `/root/f0100` that is then propagated to its parent chain, `/root`. The committment of checkpoints also triggers the execution and propagation of cross-net messages. As checkpoints flow up the chain, the `SCA` of each chain picks up these checkpoints and inspects them to propagate potential state changes triggered by messages included in the cross-net messages that have the `SCA`'s subnet as a destination subnet (see [Cross-net messages](#Cross-net-messages "Cross-net messages")).

Every checkpoint for a subnet points to the previous checkpoint being committed to ensure their integrity.

> Checkpoint template state accessor in SCA
```go
// Returns the checkpoint template to be populated for the current
// checkpoint window. The current checkpoint window is computed by 
// (currEpoch / CheckPeriod) * CheckPeriod. This determines the checkpoint
// that needs to be populated and signed for the current window.
CheckpointTemplate()

> ```

Reviewer 2: It's not entirely clear what "state accessor" is, whether it's something special or just a read-only method on the SCA state. I thought it's that, but this function definition doesn't have a return value. Not sure if it's just missing, or is it supposed to send back a message (although I don't think that would be a helpful distinction in this case).

Author: Really well spotted. It is a read-only function and it should return a checkpoint. I just fixed it.

> Checkpoints Data Structure
```go

// Checkpoints wrap the checkpoint data and
// a field dedicated for the arbitrary signing policy
// used by the subnet.
type Checkpoint struct {
    Data CheckpointData
    Sig []byte
}

// Data included in checkpoints
type CheckpointData struct {
    // Source subnet of the checkpoint.
    Source     address.SubnetID
    // Proof of the state of the subnet. In the
    // reference implementation this is the tipset
    // for the epoch in the checkpoint, but this could
    // be a ZKProof or any other proof chosen by the subnet.
    Proof     []byte
    // Epoch of the checkpoint. Determined by the
    // subnet's CheckPeriod
    Epoch     abi.ChainEpoch
    // Cid of the previous checkpoint committed for the subnet.

>     PrevCheck cid.Cid

Reviewer 2: What should be the Cid in the first checkpoint, which doesn't have a predecessor to point at? 

I'm asking because I just changed this field in Rust to `TCid<TLink<Checkpoint>>` and achieved a nasty stack overflow by the code calling `default()` on it.

Author: The previous checkpoint should be the `Cid` of an empty value (similar to what we do with empty maps). Again, due to how Go and our serialization approach works, the `Cid` needs to be set for it to work. We currently use this __horrible work-around__ (https://github.com/filecoin-project/eudico/blob/137c6ddc3c23e0ab776ec885c26c48c5b60b28ae/chain/consensus/hierarchical/checkpoints/schema/checkpoint.go#L52) that needs to be changed (we were exploring the use of IPLD schemas instead of using the cbor-marshaller, and it ended up being a pain in the ass). 

Long-story short, propose any approach that you think works for you and let's adapt it in Go and propagate it to the spec. I don't like how we are doing it there now so it'll need to change anyway.

Author: We also use this trick in Go for when we want to use generic empty values (could also be an option): https://github.com/filecoin-project/go-state-types/blob/master/abi/empty.go

Reviewer 2: I opened https://github.com/adlrocha/builtin-actors/pull/10 that makes these fields optional, but I suspected it would not necessarily be compatible with Go, so I wanted to hear your feedback. 

I thought Go _might_ just send `nil`, in which case it _might_ be compatible with a `None`. I see your code suggests it's sending the string `"nil"` which would be terrible. If we must work with that, we could add an `empty()` and `is_empty()` functions to all `TCid` variants, and for `TCid<TLink<T>>` we could use that instead of the `T::default()` which it does now. Or we can specify the `Default` for `TCid<TLink<T>>` to ignore `T` and produce the the word `"nil"`, if that's something that isn't just a wart of Go. 

This is a bit like the parent hash of a block: it's not worth turning it into an `Option` because only the genesis block has no parent, and it would be annoying to have to unwrap it everywhere. From that perspective my PR is not going in the right direction.

Author: > This is a bit like the parent hash of a block: it's not worth turning it into an Option because only the genesis block has no parent, and it would be annoying to have to unwrap it everywhere. From that perspective my PR is not going in the right direction.

Yes, it is exactly like that.

>  I see your code suggests it's sending the string "nil" which would be terrible.

This is indeed terrible, but there was no support in IPLD schemas to serialize `CidUndef`. Let me double-check how we serialize empty CIDs in Go.

Reviewer 2: For reference, this is what the default CID is in Rust: https://github.com/multiformats/rust-cid/blob/v0.8.5/src/cid.rs#L215-L223

Reviewer 2: It ultimately boils down to this:
```rust
impl<const S: usize> Default for Multihash<S> {
    fn default() -> Self {
        Self {
            code: 0,
            size: 0,
            digest: [0; S],
        }
    }
}
```

Author: I am having a hard time finding how this is handled in Go, but I presume there should be something similar to this. I just made a quick test trying to serialize a `nil` field and it fails. It looks like we don't support optional fields. Let's ask around to see how they are doing it for the rest of the actors.

Reviewer 2: If it fails, that's actually good, it means you have to set it explicitly and you can choose the value that matches Rust!

Author: Discussion moved to this PR: https://github.com/adlrocha/builtin-actors/pull/10

    // Array with the aggregation of all the checkpoints committed
    // from the subnet's children.

>     Children  []ChildCheck

Reviewer 3: I'm slightly confused here. Is the checkpoint supposed to include an array of all the child checkpoints? What does the aggregation look like?

    // Array with cross-message metadata of messages being propagated
    // in the current checkpoint.
    CrossMsgs []CrossMsgMeta
}

// Metadata pointing to the list of messages being
// propagated in the checkpoint.
type CrossMsgMeta struct {
    // Source of the cross-messages included in
    // this metadata packagle
    From    address.SubnetID
    // Destination of the cross-messages included.
    To      address.SubnetID
    // CID of the aggregation of all the messages being
    // propagated. This CID is used to uniquely identify
    // this package of messages.
    MsgsCid cid.Cid
    // Nonce of the crossMsgMeta. It is used for partial
    // ordering and to prevent replay attacks.
    Nonce   uint64
    // Aggregation of all the native tokens being transacted
    // in the included messages.
    Value   abi.TokenAmount
}

// Package with all checkpoints committed in
// the checkpoint window from children.

> type ChildChecks struct {

Reviewer 3: Should this be ChildCheck~s~? You have `Children  []ChildCheck` above.

    // Source of the checkpoints. ID of the child.
    Source address.SubnetID
    // List of cid of the checkpoints committed by
    // the child in this checkpoint window.
    Checks []cid.Cid
}

```

> Checkpoints include in their payload the following data:

Reviewer 3: This seems a little duplicative of the structure description above. I realise it's more detailed, but another point of potential failure (someone updates structure above, forgets to propagate here).

Author: Fixed.

- __`Source`__: The SubnetID of the subnet that is committing the checkpoint. The `SCA` checks that the right subnet actor is committing the checkpoint for the source to prevent forged checkpoints. 

> - __`Proof`__: The proof of the state of the subnet that is to be committed in the parent chain. In the reference implementation of the subnet actor we just include the tipset for the epoch being committed, but this proof could be a snapshot of a test, a ZK Proof, or any other piece of information that subnets want to anchor in their parent's chain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- __`Proof`__: The proof of the state of the subnet that is to be committed in the parent chain. In the reference implementation of the subnet actor, we just include the tipset for the epoch being committed, but this proof could be a snapshot of a test, a ZK Proof, or any other piece of information that subnets want to anchor in their parent's chain.
```

- __`Epoch`__: Epoch of the checkpoint being committed. The epoch must be a multiple of `CheckPeriod`.
- __`PrevCheck`__: `CID` of the previous checkpoint committed.

> - __`Children`__: Slice of checkpoints from children propagated in the corrsponding checkpointing window.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- __`Children`__: Slice of checkpoints from children propagated in the corresponding checkpointing window.
```
```suggestion
- __`Children`__: Slice of checkpoints from children propagated in the corrsponding checkpointing window.
```

> - __`CrossMsgs`__: Metadata of all the messages being propagated in the checkpoint. This metadata includes the source, destination and `CID` of the messages. Every `CrossMsgMeta` gets updated with every new checkpoint on its way up the hierarchy aggregating messages with the same destination building a tree of linked message digests with different sources but same destination. Thus, every subnet only sees the message aggregation (i.e. the digest of all the subnet's children's CrossMsgMeta list) of its children. Any subnet looking to know the specific messages behind the `CID` of a `CrossMsgMeta` -- which will be the case for the destination subnet of the messages, see [cross-net messages](#cross-net-messages) -- only needs to send a query message leveraging the [Subnet Content Resolution Protocol](#Subnet-Content-Resolution-Protocol "Subnet Content Resolution Protocol") for the cross-message `CID` to the corresponding pubsub topic of the source subnet. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- __`CrossMsgs`__: Metadata of all the messages being propagated in the checkpoint. This metadata includes the source, destination and `CID` of the messages. Every `CrossMsgMeta` gets updated with every new checkpoint on its way up the hierarchy aggregating messages with the same destination building a tree of linked message digests with different sources but the same destination. Thus, every subnet only sees the message aggregation of its children (i.e. the digest of all the subnet's children's CrossMsgMeta list). Any subnet looking to know the specific messages behind the `CID` of a `CrossMsgMeta` -- which will be the case for the destination subnet of the messages, see [cross-net messages](#cross-net-messages) -- only needs to send a query message leveraging the [Subnet Content Resolution Protocol](#Subnet-Content-Resolution-Protocol "Subnet Content Resolution Protocol") for the cross-message `CID` to the corresponding pubsub topic of the source subnet. 
```

Blocks in subnets include both messages originating within the subnet and cross-msgs targeting (or traversing) the subnet. Both types can be differentiated by looking at the `From` and `To` of the messages: cross-net messages include a `hierarchical address` (with subnet information) in both fields, while plain subnet messages include raw addresses in these fields. When a new block including top-down cross-msgs is verified in the subnet consensus, the cross-msgs are committed, and every node receiving the new block executes the cross-msgs to trigger the corresponding state changes and fund exchanges in the subnet.

### Cross-message execution

> Cross-msgs in a block are implicitly executed by calling the `ApplyMsg()` of the subnet's `SCA` from the `SystemActor`. In the execution of a new block, the `TipSetExecutor` checks if the message to be applied is a plain subnet message or a cross-net message. If it is a cross-net message, the `TipSetExecutor` tailors a new message to the `SCA`, calling `ApplyMsg()` and including the cross-net message to be executed as a parameter. This new message is applied implicitly in the node with `ApplyImplicitMsg()` (see how messages to the `CronActor` and rewards are executed in the Filecoin spec).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Cross-msgs in a block are implicitly executed by calling the `ApplyMsg()` of the subnet's `SCA` from the `SystemActor`. In the execution of a new block, the `TipSetExecutor` checks if the message to be applied is a plain subnet message or a cross-net message. If it is a cross-net message, the `TipSetExecutor` tailors a new message to the `SCA`, calling `ApplyMsg()` and including the cross-net message to be executed as a parameter. This new message is applied implicitly in the node with `ApplyImplicitMsg()` (see [how messages to the `CronActor` and rewards are executed](https://spec.filecoin.io/#section-systems.filecoin_vm.interpreter.implicit-messages) in the Filecoin spec).
```

Maybe?

What `ApplyMsg()` does to execute the cross-net message is:
- To check if it is a top-down or bottom-up message.
- According to its type, see if the message has the correct nonce according to the value of `AppliedTopDownNonce` and `AppliedBottomUpNonce`, respectively.
- Determine if the destination of the message is the current subnet or some other subnet in the hierarchy:
    - If the message is for the current subnet, the `From` and `To` of the cross-net message are translated into raw addresses, and a new `Send()` is called for the message in order to trigger the corresponding state changes in the subnet.
        - If the message is a top-down message, before the `Send()` of the cross-net messages, the amount of new tokens included in the `value` of the message (and that were locked in the `SCA` of the parent) need to be minted to allocate them to be used in the cross-net message. Thus, top-down messages mint new tokens in the subnet (with the consequent lock in the parent); while bottom-up messages burn native tokens in the subnet when they propagate bottom-up messages.

> If the message's destination is not the current subnet, the desination `Subnet` is checked to determine if the message needs to be propagated as a top-down or a bottom-up messages, conveniently adding it in `TopDownMsgs`of the next subnet in the messages path to destination, or by including it in the next checkpoint, respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the message's destination is not the current subnet, the destination `Subnet` is checked to determine if the message needs to be propagated as a top-down or a bottom-up message, conveniently adding it in `TopDownMsgs`of the next subnet in the messages path to the destination, or by including it in the next checkpoint, respectively.
```

- Increment the corresponding `AppliedNonces`.

### Top-down messages

> When a new top-down cross-net message is sent to `SCA` by calling `Fund()`, or `SendCross()` with a destination which is down in the hierarchy, the `SCA` of the source subnet:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a new top-down cross-net message is sent to the `SCA` by calling `Fund()`, or `SendCross()` with a destination which is down in the hierarchy, the `SCA` of the source subnet:
```

- Checks which child is the next subnet in the path to the messages destination.
- Assigns to the message the subsequent `Nonce` to the latest one used for that subnet. Every time a new top-down message to the subnet arrives, the `SCA` increments a nonce that is unique for every cross-net message to that destination. These nonces determine the total order of arrival of cross-msgs to the subnet; without them, different consensus nodes could execute different orderings, leading to nondeterminism. 
- Checks that that the `From` and `To` of the message include `HA` addresses with the right subnets. 
- Stores the message to notify its propagation in the `TopDownMsgs` of the corresponding child subnet.

> - Locks at the `SCA` the amount of native tokens included in the `value` of the message, increasing by the same amount the `CircSupply` of the subnet. These funds will be frozen until a bottom-up transaction releases them back to the parent. In this way, the `SCA` keeps track of the circulating supply of child subnets and is responsible for enforcing the firewall requirement in subnets (whenever native tokens want to be released from it, see [bottom-up messages](#bottom-up-messages)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Locks in the `SCA` the number of native tokens included in the `value` of the message, increasing by the same amount the `CircSupply` of the subnet. These funds will be frozen until a bottom-up transaction releases them back to the parent. In this way, the `SCA` keeps track of the circulating supply of child subnets and is responsible for enforcing the firewall requirement in subnets (whenever native tokens want to be released from it, see [bottom-up messages](#bottom-up-messages)).
```

> When a new cross-message to a subnet is included in its `TopDownMsgs`, the validators of the subnet are notified through their `CrossMsgPool` about this new top-down message. The `CrossMsgPool` waits for a `FinailityThreshold` before proposing the message to be sure that the top-down message commitment can be considered final (this `finalityThreshold` may change according to the requirements of the subnet, and the specific consensus algorithm used by the parent. The `finalityThreshold` for BFT-like consensus may be `1` or close to `1`, while sync consensus algorithms like PoW may require larger thresholds). After the `finalityThreshold`, validators in the subnet will check the latest `AppliedTopDownNonce` to fetch all unverfied cross-net message to the latest one included in `TopDownMsgs`, and propose them for their inclusion in a block and subsequent execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a new cross-message to a subnet is included in its `TopDownMsgs`, the validators of the subnet are notified through their `CrossMsgPool` about this new top-down message. The `CrossMsgPool` waits for a `finalityThreshold` before proposing the message to be sure that the top-down message commitment can be considered final (this threshold may change according to the requirements of the subnet, and the specific consensus algorithm used by the parent. The threshold for BFT-like consensus may be `1` or close to `1`, while sync consensus algorithms like PoW may require larger values). After the `finalityThreshold`, validators in the subnet will check the latest `AppliedTopDownNonce` to fetch all unverified cross-net messages up to the latest one included in `TopDownMsgs`, and propose them for their inclusion in a block and subsequent execution.
```

Finally, subnets can semlessly communicate and interact with state hosted in other subnets through cross-net messages.

### Glossary
For clarity, we include here a glossary of HC-related concepts used throughout the spec:
- __Subnet__: Hierarchical consensus sidechain that keeps its own independent state, consensus algorithm, message pool, and broadcast layer, but that is able to seamlessly interact and communciate with other subnets in the hierarchy.
- __Rootnet__: First network from which all new subnets are spawned and the hierarchy is built. In our case, the Filecoin mainnet.

> - __Parent Subnet__: Network from which a new subnet (child) is spawned. The parent is responsible for hosting the correponding subnet actors for their children.

Author: Fair point. Fixed.

    // all its initial parameter.
    // (methodNum = 1)
    Constructor(ConstructParams)
    
    // It expects as `value` the amount of collateral the 
    // source wants to stake to become part of the subne.
    // It triggers all check to see determine if the source is elegible
    // to become part of the subnet, and must propagate an `AddCollateral` message
    // to the SCA to trigger the state.
    // 
    // Join is also responsible to send a `Register` message to the SCA
    // whenever the `CollateralThreshold` is reached. This function can also
    // be used to AddCollateral for the subnet in the SCA. Additional
    // checks for this operation may be included. As a result of the
    // execution an `AddCollateral` message must be sent to the SCA 
    // including the added collateral
    // (methodNum = 2)
    Join()
    
    // Called by participants that want to leave the subnet. It triggers all
    // the checks to see if the source is eligible to leave the subnet.
    // This function must propagate a `ReleaseCollateral` message in SCA to 
    // return their collateral to the actor so a message can be triggered

>     // from the actor to return it back to its owner.

Reviewer 4: A bit hard to parse for me
message in SCA ... their collateral ... to the actor ... from the actor ... return it to its owner.

    MinValidators uint64
}
```
##### Constructor Parameters
> Constructor Parameters for reference implementation of subnet actor.
```go
type ConstructParams struct {
    // ID of the current network
    NetworkName     address.SubnetID      
    // Human-readable name for the subnet
    Name            address.SubnetID  
    // Consensus implemented in the subnet
    Consensus hierarchical.ConsensusType
    // Arbitrary consensus parameters required to initialize
    // the consensus protocol (e.g. minimum number of validators).
    // These parameters are consensus-specific.
    ConsensusParams *hierarchical.ConsensusParams
    // Minimum amount of stake required from participant 
    // to become a validator of the subnet.
    MinValidatorStake   abi.TokenAmount
    // Checkpointing period used in the subnet. It determines
    // how often the subnet propagates and commits checkpoints in its
    // parent
    CheckPeriod     abi.ChainEpoch
}
```
> TODO: There is an on-going revision of `ConstructParams` to include a way to provide arbitrary input arguments to a subnet.

## Subnet Coordinator Actor (SCA)

> The main entity responsible for handling all the lifecycle of child subnets in a specific chain is the Subnet Coordinator Actor (`SCA`). The `SCA` is a builtin-actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This actor includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. It also enforces all the security assumptions, fund management, and cryptoeconomics of the hierarchical consensus, as Subnet Actors are user-defined and can't be (fully) trusted. The `SCA` has a reserved address ID `f064`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The main entity responsible for handling all the lifecycle of child subnets in a specific chain is the Subnet Coordinator Actor (`SCA`). The `SCA` is a builtin-actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This actor includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. It also enforces all the security requirements, fund management, and cryptoeconomics of the hierarchical consensus, as Subnet Actors are user-defined and can't be (fully) trusted. The `SCA` has a reserved address ID `f064`.
```

Enforcing an assumption sounds strange to me, but feel free to keep it. Intuitively, if one could enforce it, it wouldn't be an assumption.

The MVP implementation of this builtin-actor can be found [here](https://github.com/adlrocha/builtin-actors/tree/master/actors/hierarchical_sca). The `SCA` exposes the following functions:

##### SCA Functions
> Functions of the SCA. These functions are triggered when a `message` is sent for their corresponding `methodNum`.
```go
type SCA interface{
    // Initializes the state of the SCA and sets

>     // all its initial parameter.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // all its initial parameters.
```

    // (methodNum = 1)
    Constructor(ConstructParams)
    
    // Register expects as source the address of the subnet actor of
    // the subnet that wants to be registered. Its
    // `value` an amount of collateral over the `CollateralThreshold`.
    // This functions activates the subnet and from there on other
    // subnets in the system are allowed to interact with it and the
    // subnet can start commtting its checkpoints.
    // (methodNum = 2)
    Register()
    
    // AddCollateral expects as source the address of the subnet actor
    // for which the collateral wants to be added.  Its `value` should
    // include the amount of collateral to be added for the subnet.
    // (methodNum = 3)
    AddCollateral()
    
    // ReleaseCollateral expects as source the address of the subnet actor

>     // for which the collateral wants to be released. It triggers a message

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // for which the collateral should be released. It triggers a message
```
Not sure if @vukolic agrees, but I think collateral doesn't have free will :-)

    // Latest checkpoint committed for the subnet.
    // Kept for verification purposes.
    PrevCheckpoint schema.Checkpoint
}
```

## Consensus Interface
Each subnet can run its own implementation of a consensus algorithm. In order for different consensus implementations to operate semlessly with the Filecoin stack, we decouple the core methods of the current consensus in its own interace. In order for a consensus implementation to be usuable in a subnet it needs to implement this interface.
> Consensus Interface
```go
type Consensus interface {
    // Performs a complete check of a proposed block to either
    // accept it or reject it.
    ValidateBlock(ctx context.Context, b *types.FullBlock) (err error)
    // Light check performed when a block is received through 
    // the pubsub channel.
    ValidateBlockPubsub(ctx context.Context, self bool, msg *pubsub.Message) (pubsub.ValidationResult, string)

    // Used by mining processes to assemble and propose a new
    // signed block.
    CreateBlock(ctx context.Context, w api.Wallet, bt *api.BlockTemplate) (*types.FullBlock, error)
    // Return the type of consensus. 
    Type() hierarchical.ConsensusType
}
```

> An example implementation of a BFT-like consensus protocol for HC can be found [here](https://github.com/filecoin-project/mir)

Reviewer 4: This might be a bit confusing, since the Mir actually does not implement that interface, as this is very far from the interface a BFT-style consensus would have. Instead, there is code in Eudico itself implementing that interface and using the Mir library under the hood.

Author: Yes. We'll need to add a section in the future to describe more accurately how the implementation of new consensus algorithm works (describing the role of the consensus interface, the ordering interface, maybe the mempool, etc.).

## Lifecycle of a subnet
The following section presents an overview of the lifecycle of a subnet.

### Spawning and joining a subnet
Creating a new subnet instantiates a new independent state with all its subnet-specific requirements to operate independently. This includes, in particular: a new pubsub topic that peers use as the transport layer to exchange subnet-specific messages, a new mempool instance, a new instance of the Virtual Machine (VM), as well as any other additional module required by the consensus that the subnet is running (builtin-actors, mining resources, etc.). 

> To spawn a new subnet, peers need to deploy a new `SubnetActor` that implements the core logic for the governance of the new subnet. The contract specifies the consensus protocol to be run by the subnet and the set of policies to be enforced for new members, leaving members, checkpointing, killing the subnet, etc. For a new subnet to interact with the rest of the hierarchy, it needs to be registered in the `SCA` of the parent chain. The `SCA` is a system actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This smart contract includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. And, as `SA`s are user-defined and untrusted, it also enforces security assumptions, fund management and the cryptoeconomics of hierarchical consensus.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To spawn a new subnet, peers need to deploy a new `SubnetActor` that implements the core logic for the governance of the new subnet. The contract specifies the consensus protocol to be run by the subnet and the set of policies to be enforced for new members, leaving members, checkpointing, killing the subnet, etc. For a new subnet to interact with the rest of the hierarchy, it needs to be registered in the `SCA` of the parent chain. The `SCA` is a system actor that exposes the interface for subnets to interact with the hierarchical consensus protocol. This smart contract includes all the available functionalities related to subnets and their management. And, as `SA`s are user-defined and untrusted, it also enforces security requirements, fund management and the cryptoeconomics of hierarchical consensus.
```

> Subnets are identified with a unique ID that is inferred deterministically from the ID of its ancestor and from the ID of the `SA` that governs its operation. This deterministic naming enables the discovery of --- and interaction with --- subnets from any other point in the hierarchy without the need of a discovery service: peers need only send a message to the subnet's specific pubsub topic, identified with the subnet's ID.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Subnets are identified with a unique ID that is inferred deterministically from the ID of its ancestor and from the ID of the `SA` that governs the subnet's operation. This deterministic naming enables the discovery of --- and interaction with --- subnets from any other point in the hierarchy without the need of a discovery service: peers only need to send a message to the subnet's specific pubsub topic, identified with the subnet's ID.
```

> For a subnet to be registered in the `SCA`, the actor needs to send a new message to the `Register()` function of the `SCA`. This transaction includes the amount of tokens the subnet wants to add as collateral in the parent chain to secure the child chain. To perform this transaction, the `SA` should have enough funds available, other peers need to have joined and staked in the `SA` according to its policy to fund the register transaction. For a subnet to be activated in HC, at least `CollateralThreshold` needs to be staked in the `SCA`.

Reviewer 4: > To perform this transaction, the `SA` should have enough funds available, other peers need to have joined and staked in the `SA` according to its policy to fund the register transaction.

This is a bit hard to parse for me.

### Leaving and killing a subnet

> Members of a subnet can leave the subnet at any point by sending a message to the subnet's `SA` in the parent chain. If the miner fulfils the requirements to leave the subnet defined in the subnet's `SA` when it was deployed, a message to the `SCA` is triggered by the `SA` to release the miner's collateral.  If a miner leaving the subnet brings the collateral of the subnet below `CollateralThreshold`, the subnet gets in an `Inactive` state, and it can no longer interact with the rest of chains in the hierarchy or checkpoint to the top chain. To recover its `Active` state, users of the subnet need to put up additional collateral.

Reviewer 4: Users or validators need to put up additional collateral?

## Naming
Every subnet is identified with a unique `SubnetID`. This ID is assigned deterministically and is inferred from the `SubnetID` of the parent and the address of the subnet actor in the parent responsible for governing the subnet. The rootnet in HC always has the same ID, `/root`. From there on, every subnet spawned from the root chain is identified through the address of their `SA`. Thus, if a new subnet is being registered from an actor with ID `f0100`, the subnet is assigned an ID `/root/f0100`. Actor IDs are unique through the lifetime of a network. Generating subnet IDs using the `SA` ID ensures that they are unique throughout the whole history of the system.

> The assignment of IDs to subnets is recursive, so the same protocol is used as we move deeper into the hierarchy. A subnet represented by `SA` with address `f0200` spawned in `/root/f0100` is identified as `/root/f0100/f0200`. To create the subnet ID to any subnet we just need to add the address of its subnet actor as a suffix to its parent's ID. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The assignment of IDs to subnets is recursive, so the same protocol is used as we move deeper into the hierarchy. A subnet represented by `SA` with address `f0200` spawned in `/root/f0100` is identified as `/root/f0100/f0200`. To create the subnet ID of any subnet, we just need to add the address of its subnet actor as a suffix to its parent's ID. 
```

This naming convention allows to deterministically discover and interact with any subnet in the system. It also offers an implicit map of the hierarchy. Peers looking to interact with a subnet only need to know their `SubnetID`, and publish  a message to the pubsub topic with the same name. 

Peers participating in a subnet are subscribed to all subnet-specific topics and are able to pick up the message. Subnet-specific pubsub topics are named also deterministically by using the subnet's ID as a suffix to the topic. Thus, subnets spawn (at least) three different topics for their operation: the `/fil/msgs/<subnetID>` topics to broadcast mempool messages; the `/fil/blocks/<subnetID>` topic to distribute new blocks; and the `/fil/resolver/<subnetID>` topic where cross-net content resolution messages are exchanged. These topics for subnet `/root/f0100` are identified as `/fil/msgs/root/f0100`, `/fil/blocks/root/f0100`, `/fil/resolver/root/f0100`, respectively.

> Peers can also poll the available child chains of a specific subnet sending a query to the `SCA` requesting to list its children. This allows any peer to traverse the full hierarchy and update their view of available subnets.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Peers can also poll the available child chains of a specific subnet by sending a query to the `SCA` requesting to list its children. This allows any peer to traverse the full hierarchy and update their view of available subnets.
```

> In the future, HC may implement an additional DNS-like actor in the system that allows the discovery of subnets using human-readable names, thus making the transaction between a domain name and the underlying ID of a subnet.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the future, HC may implement an additional DNS-like actor in the system that allows the discovery of subnets using human-readable names, performing a translation between a domain name and the underlying ID of a subnet.
```

### SubnetID

> `SubnetID`s are the unique identifiers of subnets. While its string representation resembles a path directory (see examples above), the following objects is used for its byte and in-memory representation (its serialized representation, is the CBOR marshalling of this object):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A `SubnetID` is the unique identifier of a subnet. While its string representation resembles a directory path (see examples above), the following object is used for its byte and in-memory representation (its serialized representation is the CBOR marshalling of this object):
```

```go
type SubnetID struct {
    // string representation of the parent SubnetID
    Parent string 
    // Address of the subnet actor governing the operation
    // of the subnet in the parent.
    // (it must be a an ID address)
    Actor address.Address
}
```

> `SubnetID` includes the following convenient methods to aide in the use of `SubnetID`s.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`SubnetID` includes the following convenience methods to aid in the use of `SubnetID`s.
```

In order for a new checkpoint to be accepted for commitment in `SCA`, the source of the message `CommitChildCheckpoint()` needs to be the address of the subnet actor of the corresponding subnet; the subnet needs to be in an `Active` state (i.e. its collateral is over `CollateralThreshold`); the epoch of the checkpoint should be a multiple of `CheckPeriod` and larger that that of the previous checkpoint; and the checkpoint must point to the `CID` of the previous checkpoint committed by the subnet. 

> When spawned, subnets are allowed to configure the `CheckpointPeriod` that better suits their needs and the specifics of its consensus algorithm.

Author: No, it's a typo. It should be `CheckPeriod`. Fixed.

> TODO: Add a figure of how `CrossMsgMeta` are aggregated?

## Cross-net messages
Users in a subnet interact with other subnets through cross-net transactions (or messages). The propagation of a cross-net transaction may slightly differ depending on the location of subnets in the hierarchy (i.e. if moving up or down the hierarchy). In particular, we distinguish the following type of cross-net messages: 

- __Top-down messages__ _(brown)_ are cross-msgs directed towards a subnet that is lower in the hierarchy (e.g. from `/root/f0100` to `/root/f0200`).
- __Bottom-up  messages__ _(green)_ are cross-msgs directed towards a subnet that is higher in the hierarchy but shares the same prefix (e.g  from  `/root/f0100/f0200` to `root/f0100`).
- __Path messages__ _(pink)_. Every message routed in the hierarchy can be seen as a combination of top-down and bottom-up transactions. Path messages are cross-net messages in which the source and destination subnets are not in the same branch. These are propagated through bottom-up messages (i.e. `CrossMsgMeta` in checkpoints) up to the common parent (`/root`, in the worst case) and through top-down messages from there to the destination.

> ![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/rJg6aduKq.png)

Author: Fixed.

- Checks if the destination of the `CrossMsgMeta` is the current subnet; a subnet higher up in the hierarchy; or a subnet that is down in the hierarchy.
    - If the `CrossMsgMeta` points to the current subnet or to some other subnet down the current branch of the hierarchy in its `To`, the `CrossMsgMeta` is stored with the subsequent `BottomUpNonce` in `BottomUpMsgsMeta` to notify the `CrossMsgPool` that the cross-msgs inside the `CrossMsgMeta` need to be conveniently executed (or routed down).
    - If the `CrossMsgsMeta` points to a subnet that needs to be routed up, `SCA` executes the same logic as when a new bottom-up cross-msg is created in the subnet, but appending the `CrossMsgsMeta` into the `Meta` field of `CrossMsgs`. The corresponding `CrossMsgsMeta` of the current checkpoint is created or updated to include this meta for it to be propagated further up in the next checkpoint. Thus, the `CID` of the new `CrossMsgMeta` for the parent includes a single `CID` that already aggregates a link to the `CrossMsgMeta` of the child with cross-messages that need to go even upper in the hierarchy.

> Validators `CrossMsgPool`s also listen for new `BottomUpMsgsMeta` being included in their subnet SCA. When a new `CrossMsgsMeta` appear in `BottomUpMsgsMeta` (after the committment of a checkpoint), the `CrossMsgPool` checks if `CrossMsgsMeta.Nonce > AppliedBottomUpNonce` to see if it includes cross-msgs that haven't been executed yet. If this is the case, the `CrossMsgPool`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Validators' `CrossMsgPool`s also listen for new `BottomUpMsgsMeta` being included in their subnet SCA. When a new `CrossMsgsMeta` appears in `BottomUpMsgsMeta` (after the committment of a checkpoint), the `CrossMsgPool` checks if `CrossMsgsMeta.Nonce > AppliedBottomUpNonce` to see if it includes cross-msgs that haven't been executed yet. If this is the case, the `CrossMsgPool`:
```

- Gets all `CrossMsgsMeta` in `BottomUpMsgsMeta` with `Nonce > AppliedBottomUpNonce`.
- Gets `CrossMsgMeta.Cid` and makes a request to the subnet content resolution protocol to resolve the `CrossMsgs` behind that `CrossMsgMeta`. These requests are directed to the subnet in `Source` and they resolve the CID from the subnet's `CrossMsgsRegistry`. 
    - If the resolved `CrossMsgs` only includes elements in the `Msgs` field, they can be directly proposed in the next block for their execution.

>     - If this is not the case, and `CrossMsgs` includes in its `Meta` field `CrossMsgMetas` from its children, then these `CrossMsgsMeta` need to be resolved recursively until all the `CrossMsgsMeta` have been resolved to their underlaying messages successfully.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - If this is not the case, and `CrossMsgs` includes in its `Meta` field `CrossMsgMetas` from its children, then these `CrossMsgsMeta` need to be resolved recursively until all the `CrossMsgsMeta` have been successfully resolved to their underlying messages.
```

> - Then, as it happened for top-down messages, when the `CrossMsgPool`  has all the bottom-up messages to be applied, it waits for a `FinailityThreshold` before proposing the message to be sure that the checkpoint commitment can be considered final, and all the resolved cross-messages are proposed for their inclusion and subsequent execution. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Then, as it happened for top-down messages, when the `CrossMsgPool` has all the bottom-up messages to be applied, it waits for a `FinailityThreshold` before proposing the messages to be sure that the checkpoint commitment can be considered final, and all the resolved cross-messages are proposed for their inclusion and subsequent execution. 
```

![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/Bkrzj2uF5.png)

### Path messages

> Path messages are propagated and executed as a combination of bottom-up and top-down messages according the path they need to traverse in the hierarchy. Let's consider a message from `/root/f0100/f0200` to `/root/f0100/f0300`. This message is propagated as a set of bottom-up message up to the closes common parent (`/root/f0100` in our example). When the checkpoint including the cross-message from `/root/f0100/f0200` arrives to `/root/f0100`, the `CrossMsgMeta` is resolved, and from there on, the message is propagated as a top-down message from the closest common parent to the destination (in this case, from `/root/f0100` to `/root/f0100/f0300`),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Path messages are propagated and executed as a combination of bottom-up and top-down messages according the path they need to traverse in the hierarchy. Let's consider a message from `/root/f0100/f0200` to `/root/f0100/f0300`. This message is propagated as a set of bottom-up message up to the closest common parent (`/root/f0100` in our example). When the checkpoint including the cross-message from `/root/f0100/f0200` arrives to `/root/f0100`, the `CrossMsgMeta` is resolved, and from there on, the message is propagated as a top-down message from the closest common parent to the destination (in this case, from `/root/f0100` to `/root/f0100/f0300`),
```

#### Errors propagating cross-net messages

> If at any point the propagation or execution of a cross-msg fails (either because the message runs out of gas in-transit; because the message is invalid in the destination subnet; or because the `CrossMsgMeta.Cid` can't be resolved successfully), the message is discarded, and a error is tracked for the cross-message.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If at any point the propagation or execution of a cross-msg fails (either because the message runs out of gas in-transit; because the message is invalid in the destination subnet; or because the `CrossMsgMeta.Cid` can't be resolved successfully), the message is discarded, and an error is tracked for the cross-message.
```

What does it mean to "track" an error?

> TODO: Come up with error codes for message failures and how to propagate them to the source. Only the source will be notified.

### Minting and burning native tokens in subnets

> Native tokens are injected to the circulating supply of a subnet by performing top-down messages. These messages lock the amount of tokens included in the `value` of the message in the `SCA` of the parent, and they trigger the minting of new tokens in the subnet when they are executed. To mint new tokens in the subnet, we include a new `SubnetMint` method with `methodNum=5` to the `RewardActor`. `SubnetMint` can only be called by the `SCA` in a subnet through `ApplyMsg()` method when executing a message. `SubnetMint` funds the `SCA` with enough minted native tokens to provide the destination address with its corresponding subnet tokens (see [sample implementation](https://github.com/filecoin-project/eudico/blob/bb52565105f7fe716463b1e09dad7492569089f5/chain/consensus/actors/reward/reward_actor.go#L94)).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Native tokens are injected to the circulating supply of a subnet by applying top-down messages. These messages lock the amount of tokens included in the `value` of the message in the `SCA` of the parent, and they trigger the minting of new tokens in the subnet when they are executed. To mint new tokens in the subnet, we include a new `SubnetMint` method with `methodNum=5` to the `RewardActor`. `SubnetMint` can only be called by the `SCA` in a subnet through `ApplyMsg()` method when executing a message. `SubnetMint` funds the `SCA` with enough minted native tokens to provide the destination address with its corresponding subnet tokens (see [sample implementation](https://github.com/filecoin-project/eudico/blob/bb52565105f7fe716463b1e09dad7492569089f5/chain/consensus/actors/reward/reward_actor.go#L94)).
```

Validators in subnets are exclusively rewarded in native-tokens through message fees, so the balance of the `RewardActor` in subnets is only used to increase the circulating supply in a subnet by order of the `SCA`. For new native tokens to be minted in a subnet, the same amount of tokens need to have been locked in the `SCA` of the parent.

> Note: This change of the reward actor is not required for the `rootnet`. We can have a custom bundle with the modified `RewardActor` to be used exclusively for subnets.

> On the other hand, bottom-up messages release funds from a subnet (reducing its circulating supply). In this case, burning the funds from the subnet is straightforward. When the bottom-up messages are included in a checkpoint, the `SCA` triggers a message with the `value` amount of native-tokens to the `BurnActorAddress` of the subnet. Once the checkpoint is committed to the parent, and the messages executed, the same amount of native tokens will be released from the parent's `SCA` and conveniently sent to the destination addresses of the bottom-up messages.

Reviewer 4: conveniently...?

Every checkpoint for a subnet points to the previous checkpoint being committed to ensure their integrity.

> Checkpoint template read-only function in SCA
```go
// Returns the checkpoint template to be populated for the current
// checkpoint window. The current checkpoint window is computed by 
// (currEpoch / CheckPeriod) * CheckPeriod. This determines the checkpoint
// that needs to be populated and signed for the current window.
CheckpointTemplate() Checkpoint
```

As shown on the next figure, the checkpointing protocol has two distinct stages:
- __Checkpoint Window__: In this window, the `SCA` opens a checkpoint template and starts populating it with cross-net messages arriving to the subnet (and that need to be propagated further inside the checkpoint) and with the aggregated checkpoints committed from the current subnet's children. The checkpoint window for the checkpoint in epoch `n` starts at `n-CheckPeriod` and ends at epoch `n`.

> - __Signing Window__: The signing window is the time range reserved for validators of the subnet to populate the checkpoint template with the corresponding proof of the state of the checkpoint, to sign the checkpoint, and to submit it to the corresponding `SA` in the parent for committment. The signing window for the checkpoint in epoch `n` goes from `n` to `n+CheckPeriod`. Consequently, the signing window for the checkpoint of epoch `n-CheckPeriod` and the checkpoint window for the checkpoint of epoch `n` is run in parallel. The checkpoint template provided by the `SCA` has `CrossMsgs`, `PrevCheck`, and `Epoch` already populated, and validators only have to add the corresponding `Proof` and sign it.

Reviewer 2: Can we say what happens if the signatures are not collected during the signing window? The spec only seems to talk about the happy path.

Reviewer 2: Just a note: I can't see `Proof` in the Rust code.

Author: > Can we say what happens if the signatures are not collected during the signing window? The spec only seems to talk about the happy path.

True. Let me add a note.

> Just a note: I can't see Proof in the Rust code.

My bad. I called it `tip_set` (as initially we are just propagating the tipset for the epoch) but we should rename it to `proof`. Good call. Thanks! 
https://github.com/adlrocha/builtin-actors/blob/master/actors/hierarchical_sca/src/checkpoint.rs#L122

Author: Resolving comment and tracking this here: https://github.com/adlrocha/builtin-actors/issues/11

> ![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/HkAodIuFc.png)

Reviewer 2: Should we check in the source code for the drawing?

Author: We should switch to some figure generation language for this(as you suggested in some other comment). These figures come from this slide deck (so no source code available): https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1w-1XpwPrsBxjd1OScsbhuOvUdXz2DyQHAeY7gCbpfj4/edit

Do you mind if we resolve this comment and consider this for the next iteration?

Reviewer 2: Sure! I just wanted to suggest that if there were any source code available, it could be a good idea to make them available for anyone who wants to maintain them. The link you included should be good for that!

- Checks which child is the next subnet in the path to the messages destination.
- Assigns to the message the subsequent `Nonce` to the latest one used for that subnet. Every time a new top-down message to the subnet arrives, the `SCA` increments a nonce that is unique for every cross-net message to that destination. These nonces determine the total order of arrival of cross-msgs to the subnet; without them, different consensus nodes could execute different orderings, leading to nondeterminism. 
- Checks that that the `From` and `To` of the message include `HA` addresses with the right subnets. 
- Stores the message to notify its propagation in the `TopDownMsgs` of the corresponding child subnet.
- Locks in the `SCA` the number of native tokens included in the `value` of the message, increasing by the same amount the `CircSupply` of the subnet. These funds will be frozen until a bottom-up transaction releases them back to the parent. In this way, the `SCA` keeps track of the circulating supply of child subnets and is responsible for enforcing the firewall requirement in subnets (whenever native tokens want to be released from it, see [bottom-up messages](#bottom-up-messages)).

> When a new cross-net message to a subnet is included in its `TopDownMsgs`, the validators of the subnet are notified through their `CrossMsgPool` about this new top-down message. The `CrossMsgPool` waits for a `finalityThreshold` before proposing the message to be sure that the top-down message commitment can be considered final (this threshold may change according to the requirements of the subnet, and the specific consensus algorithm used by the parent. The threshold for BFT-like consensus may be `1` or close to `1`, while sync consensus algorithms like PoW may require larger values). After the `finalityThreshold`, validators in the subnet will check the latest `AppliedTopDownNonce` to fetch all unverified cross-net messages up to the latest one included in `TopDownMsgs`, and propose them for their inclusion in a block and subsequent execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a new cross-net message to a subnet is included in the `TopDownMsgs` in the parent subnet, the validators of the child subnet, who follow the parent consensus, are notified through their `CrossMsgPool` about this new top-down message. The `CrossMsgPool` waits for a `finalityThreshold` before proposing the message to be sure that the top-down message commitment can be considered final (this threshold may change according to the requirements of the subnet, and the specific consensus algorithm used by the parent. The threshold for BFT-like consensus may be `1` or close to `1`, while sync consensus algorithms like PoW may require larger values). After the `finalityThreshold`, validators in the child subnet will check the latest `AppliedTopDownNonce` to fetch all unverified cross-net messages up to the latest one included in `TopDownMsgs`, and propose them for their inclusion in a block and subsequent execution.
```

I may be getting this wrong, sorry. The `TopDownMsgs` is something a child operator sees in the ledger of the parent chain, right? They wait for it to be final, then they pluck it out and relay it to their child chain, unless `AppliedTopDownNonce` indicates this has already happened.

Or do these top down messages sit in the child ledger, unexecuted until finality is reached in the parent?

I'm also unclear what kind of proof is needed for them to be included and executed: are validators in the child subnet rejecting top down messages included in blocks by adversarial peers if they can't see them being finalized in the parent chain yet?

Author: The former. `AppliedTopDownNonce` aggregates all top-down messages directed to a child subnet. The `CrossMsgPool` in the subnet waits for finality before proposing it in a block of the child consensus. Full-nodes receiving blocks in the child subnet including these cross-messages check in the parent ledger if the cross-net message is final and part of `AppliedTopDownNonce` and won't accept blocks that don't satisfy the requirement.

In the next iteration we should consider including more succinct proofs to prevent the parent synchronization from delaying too much validators in the subnet.

> Bottom-up messages and checkpoint propagation data structures
```go

// Metadata pointing to the list of messages being
// propagated in the checkpoint.
type CrossMsgMeta struct {
    // Source of the cross-net messages included in
    // this metadata package
    From    address.SubnetID
    // Destination of the cross-net messages included.
    To      address.SubnetID
    // CID of the aggregation of all the messages being
    // propagated. This CID is used to uniquely identify
    // this package of messages.
    MsgsCid cid.Cid
    // Nonce of the crossMsgMeta. It is used for partial
    // ordering and to prevent replay attacks.
    Nonce   uint64
    // Aggregation of all the native tokens being transacted
    // in the included messages.
    Value   abi.TokenAmount
}

// CrossMsgs is the data structure used to persist in the
// `CrossMsgsRegistry` the `Msgs` and `CrossMsgMeta` 
// propagated in checkpoints
type CrossMsgs struct {
    // Raw msgs from the subnet
    Msgs  []Message   
    // Metas propagated from child subnets

>     Metas []CrossMsgMeta 

Reviewer 2: I don't see `CrossMsgMeta` defined anywhere.

Author: It is described in the `cross-net message` section. I'll add a pointer to that section (I didn't want to have duplicate definitions).

}

// MetaTag is a convenient struct
// used to compute the Cid of the MsgMeta
type MetaTag struct {
    MsgsCid  cid.Cid

>     MetasCid cid.Cid

Reviewer 2: It would be good to have at least a comment to what kind of `Cid` these are, and in all other raw Cid cases as well.
I tried filling them in in my PRs but I find myself going in circles in the code to figure out if I did the right thing.

Author: Fixed. I typed every CID in the spec as to complement your PRs. Thanks. (I will push the PR with the update soon)

    // This function can only be executed if no collateral or circulating
    // supply is left for the subnet (i.e. balance = 0).
    // (methodNum = 5)
    Kill()
    
    // CommitChildCheckpoint expects as source the address of the subnet actor for which the
    // checkpoint is being committed. The function performs some basic checks
    // to ensure that checkpoint is valid and it persist it in the SCA state.
    // (methodNum = 6)
    CommitChildCheckpoint(ch Checkpoint)
    
    // Fund can be called by any user in a subnet and it injects 
    // the `value` of native tokens included in the message to the source's address in
    // the child subnet given as argument.
    // (methodNum = 7)
    Fund(address.SubnetID)
    
    // Release can be called by any user in a subnet to release the amount 
    // of native tokens included in `value` from its own address in the
    // subnet to the address in the parent. 
    // (methodNum = 8)
    Release()
    
    // SendCross can be called by any user in the subnet to send 
    // an arbitrary cross-net message to any other subnet in
    // the hierarchy.
    // (methodNum = 9)

>     SendCross(msg CrossMsgParams)

Reviewer 2: `CrossMsgParams` is never laid out as a data structure.

When a new cross-net message to a subnet is included in its `TopDownMsgs`, the validators of the subnet are notified through their `CrossMsgPool` about this new top-down message. The `CrossMsgPool` waits for a `finalityThreshold` before proposing the message to be sure that the top-down message commitment can be considered final (this threshold may change according to the requirements of the subnet, and the specific consensus algorithm used by the parent. The threshold for BFT-like consensus may be `1` or close to `1`, while sync consensus algorithms like PoW may require larger values). After the `finalityThreshold`, validators in the subnet will check the latest `AppliedTopDownNonce` to fetch all unverified cross-net messages up to the latest one included in `TopDownMsgs`, and propose them for their inclusion in a block and subsequent execution.

![](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/rynGK2ut5.png)

### Bottom-up messages

#### Including messages in `CrossMsgMeta`

> Bottom-up messages are created by sending a message to the `Release()` or `SendCross()` methods of the source subnet's `SCA`. `Release()` sends a cross-net message to the parent of the subnet releasing some funds from the subnet, while `SendCross()` sends an arbitrary message and is routed as a bottom-up message when it includes in its `CrossMsgsParams` a destination subnet in the upper layers of the hierarchy or with a common parent higher in the hierarchy. Bottom-up messages are propagated inside checkpoints. At every checkpoint period, the `SCA` collects and aggregates all `CrossMsgMeta` from bottom-up transactions originated in the subnet, as well as all the `CrossMsgMeta`. All these `CrossMsgMeta`are included in the next checkpoint for their propagation up the hierarchy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bottom-up messages are created by sending a message to the `Release()` or `SendCross()` methods of the source subnet's `SCA`. `Release()` sends a cross-net message to the parent of the subnet releasing some funds from the subnet, while `SendCross()` sends an arbitrary message and is routed as a bottom-up message when it includes in its `CrossMsgParams` a destination subnet in the upper layers of the hierarchy or with a common parent higher in the hierarchy. Bottom-up messages are propagated inside checkpoints. At every checkpoint period, the `SCA` collects and aggregates all `CrossMsgMeta` from bottom-up transactions originated in the subnet, as well as all the `CrossMsgMeta`. All these `CrossMsgMeta`are included in the next checkpoint for their propagation up the hierarchy.
```

    // this package of messages.
    MsgsCid cid.Cid
    // Nonce of the crossMsgMeta. It is used for partial
    // ordering and to prevent replay attacks.
    Nonce   uint64
    // Aggregation of all the native tokens being transacted
    // in the included messages.
    Value   abi.TokenAmount
}

// CrossMsgs is the data structure used to persist in the
// `CrossMsgsRegistry` the `Msgs` and `CrossMsgMeta` 
// propagated in checkpoints
type CrossMsgs struct {
    // Raw msgs from the subnet
    Msgs  []Message   
    // Metas propagated from child subnets
    // (full definition of CrossMsgMeta in cross-net message
    // section)
    Metas []CrossMsgMeta 
}

// MetaTag is a convenient struct
// used to compute the Cid of the MsgMeta
type MetaTag struct {
    MsgsCid  cid.Cid
    MetasCid cid.Cid
}
```

#### Executing bottom-up messages
When a new checkpoint for a child subnet is committed in a network, the `SCA` checks if it includes any `CrossMsgMeta` before storing it in its state. If this is the case, it means that there are pending cross-msgs to be executed or propagated further in the hierarchy. For every `CrossMsgMeta` in the checkpoint, the `SCA`:

> - Checks if the `Value` included in the `CrossMsgMeta` for the source subnet is below the total `CircSupply` of native tokens for the subnet. If the `Value > CircSupply`, `SCA` rejects the cross-msgs included in the `CrossMsgMeta` due to a violation of the firewall requirement. If `Value <= CircSupply` then the `CrossMsgMeta` is accepted, and `CircSupply` is decremented by `Value`.

Reviewer 2: I understand how `Fund` and `Release` work because it's clear who will get tokens in which subnet. 

My question is, what happens if Alice in `/root/subnet-1/subnet-11` wants to send 10 FIL to Bob in `/root/subnet-2/subnet-21`? Do cross messages have a notion of the `Value` included in token transfers between users at all? Or is it only the HC related messages where `Value` is tracked?

Let's say that HC was able to cater for this use case. 

If Alice wanted to send from `/root` to `/root/subnet-2/subnet-21`, she would spend 10 in root, get 10 in subnet-2, then she would I assume have to pay the fees for the funds to go into subnet-21. If she doesn't have an account in subnet-2, maybe she'd only be able to forward 10-fees. Bob would get whatever's left.

Going up from `/root/subnet-1/subnet-11` to `/root` would mean the release of her funds, for which she pays the fee in subnet-11, she gets 10 in subnet-1. Then if she didn't have any funds there, she has to pay fees for it to go further up. 

Do I get the fee mechanism right? What if it's not a transfer, when we don't now what kind of message we are sending? Does Alice have to have an account in each subnet along the path to pay for the next leg?

Reviewer 3: I _think_ what you're asking is tentatively explained at the end of the document:

> With this information, cross-net message will include an array of `gas_limit` amounts that the message is willing to allocate to each subnet in the hop. Subnets in the path won't be able to charge over the specified `gas_limit` for the subnet. When a cross-net reaches a subnet for which `gas_limit` is insufficient, it fails and an error message is propagated back to the source, along with the unspent gas.

I don't think Value is affected at all.

Author: Great points, @aakoshh. The design for fee handling hasn't been fully finalized. The current proposal is that the `Value` doesn't change in-route, and the source address in the source subnet needs to provision in the message `value + sum(gas_limit_subnet)`. In each subnet in the path to the destination at most `gas_limit_subnet` will be paid (if not the message fails and is not routed further). At destination, the remaining tokens not used for paying fees is deposited in the originators address in the destination subnet.

Actually, I'll update that section with our current thinking so we can start gathering feedback for it.

Reviewer 2: Oh, thanks @jsoares I completely missed that part on my second read. I did not expect it to be at the bottom of the page, rather than colocated with the explanation of bottom-up and top-down message handling.

Thanks @adlrocha, I think I get it. This means (and I think this would be worth pointing out in the text), in my example this does not mean that Alice has to have an account every step of the way; she is charged the full amount in the source subnet, then in the higher level subnets the `CircSupply` is reduced by `Value + remaining-fees`, and the validator proposing the block in the given subnet chips away at the value, up to the limit of the fees set for their level, before sending the transaction on with an adjusted value. Not sure if Alice can get any refunds for unspent gas.

Author: > Oh, thanks @jsoares I completely missed that part on my second read. I did not expect it to be at the bottom of the page, rather than colocated with the explanation of bottom-up and top-down message handling.

Fair point. I will move the section up. The reason why is there is because we are exploring these mechanics as part of our collaboration with CEL, and for completeness we kept everything in the crytpo-econ seection.

>  Alice has to have an account every step of the way; she is charged the full amount in the source subnet, then in the higher level subnets the CircSupply is reduced by Value + remaining-fees, and the validator proposing the block in the given subnet chips away at the value, up to the limit of the fees set for their level, before sending the transaction on with an adjusted value.

Correct

> Not sure if Alice can get any refunds for unspent gas.

She can. The remaining fees are routes with the message to the destination subnet. Once the message executed in the destination subnet, if there are any remaining funds in the message, they are deposited in Alice's address in the destination subnet. Makes sense?

Reviewer 2: Yes, that makes sense. 

Although I would not be surprised if users wanted their funds returned to where they came from, so their applications are simplified and don't have to track funds scattered around all the subnets they ever sent messages to. This could happen any time, whenever there is bandwidth, offered as a free service, included in the price of the original hops. In a way it happens anyway if there is an error, to return the unspent fees and provide feedback. 

Perhaps the feedback mechanism could be applied in the successful case as well, so a sent message will always get an echo with the remaining fees and the outcome of whether it could be delivered and is stable. The stability could be indicated by the applied nonces being included in a checkpoint. That might not exist to day, but may be worth doing. 

I think the [IBC protocol](https://ibcprotocol.org/) also contains acknowledgements going back.

Validators' `CrossMsgPool`s also listen for new `BottomUpMsgsMeta` being included in their subnet SCA. When a new `CrossMsgsMeta` appears in `BottomUpMsgsMeta` (after the committment of a checkpoint), the `CrossMsgPool` checks if `CrossMsgsMeta.Nonce > AppliedBottomUpNonce` to see if it includes cross-msgs that haven't been executed yet. If this is the case, the `CrossMsgPool`:
- Gets all `CrossMsgsMeta` in `BottomUpMsgsMeta` with `Nonce > AppliedBottomUpNonce`.
- Gets `CrossMsgMeta.Cid` and makes a request to the subnet content resolution protocol to resolve the `CrossMsgs` behind that `CrossMsgMeta`. These requests are directed to the subnet in `Source` and they resolve the CID from the subnet's `CrossMsgsRegistry`. 
    - If the resolved `CrossMsgs` only includes elements in the `Msgs` field, they can be directly proposed in the next block for their execution.
    - If this is not the case, and `CrossMsgs` includes in its `Meta` field `CrossMsgMetas` from its children, then these `CrossMsgsMeta` need to be resolved recursively until all the `CrossMsgsMeta` have been successfully resolved to their underlying messages.

> - Then, as it happened for top-down messages, when the `CrossMsgPool` has all the bottom-up messages to be applied, it waits for a `FinailityThreshold` before proposing the messages to be sure that the checkpoint commitment can be considered final, and all the resolved cross-net messages are proposed for their inclusion and subsequent execution. 

Reviewer 2: I thought the pre-requisite for these bottom-up messages to appear on the radar of the parent SCA is for the SA representing the child chain to forward to it a checkpoint, which was assembled by the child SCA and signed by the validators in the child chain. By definition it should be final. 

What exact finality are we waiting before proposing these messages in a block?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Then, as it happened for top-down messages, when the `CrossMsgPool` has all the bottom-up messages to be applied, it waits for a `FinalityThreshold` before proposing the messages to be sure that the checkpoint commitment can be considered final, and all the resolved cross-net messages are proposed for their inclusion and subsequent execution. 
```

Validators in subnets are exclusively rewarded in native-tokens through message fees, so the balance of the `RewardActor` in subnets is only used to increase the circulating supply in a subnet by order of the `SCA`. For new native tokens to be minted in a subnet, the same amount of tokens need to have been locked in the `SCA` of the parent.

> Note: This change of the reward actor is not required for the `rootnet`. We can have a custom bundle with the modified `RewardActor` to be used exclusively for subnets.

On the other hand, bottom-up messages release funds from a subnet (reducing its circulating supply). In this case, burning the funds from the subnet is straightforward. When the bottom-up messages are included in a checkpoint, the `SCA` triggers a message with the `value` amount of native-tokens to the `BurnActorAddress` of the subnet. Once the checkpoint is committed to the parent, and the messages executed, the same amount of native tokens will be released from the parent's `SCA` and sent in a message to the destination addresses of the bottom-up messages.

    
## Subnet Content Resolution Protocol

> For scalability reasons, when the destination subnet receives a new checkpoint with cross-net messages to be executed, it is only provided with the `CID` of the aggregated messages inside the `CrossMsgMeta`. For the subnet to be able to trigger the corresponding state changes for all the messages, it needs to fetch the payload of messages behind that `CID`, as illustrated in previous sections. The subnet `SCA` where the bottom-up message is generated keeps a `CrossMsgsRegistry` with all `CID`s for `CrossMsgsMeta` propagated (i.e. a content-addressable key-value store), used to fulfill content resolution requests.

Author: > And this registry will hold on to the messages included in all previous checkpoints, forever, right?

Correct. We keep the latest version of `CrossMsgs`.

> Would IPLD somehow recognise that the b1 store entry is referenced, but b2 is not?

Unfortunately, not. This would need to be handled in the persistence layer (i.e. the datastore used to persist the objects behind the links). This is one of the reasons why I personally think that having a DSL/programming language based on IPLD could be really powerful. The compiler could handle this kind of checks.

## Cross-net routing gas price
> WIP. This is just a placeholder for this section. The content included is not final. Follow all design updates [here](https://hackmd.io/HpxNIaacTn2_t6jaDs9RcQ)

Cross-net messages from a source subnet, `sn_src`, to some other subnet in the hierarchy,`sn_dest`, need to be provided with enough gas for the message to be executed and routed successfully by every subnet in the path `Path(sn_src, sn_dest)`. Cross-net messages within a subnet are treated like any other message, and their execution triggers some state change that costs a certain amount of gas in the subnet, `gas_cost_sn`. The main difference for cross-net messages is that this execution and state change may translate into the propagation of the message to the next subnet in the path. However, for a user to be able to provide the message with enough gas, it needs to have a sense of the cost of execution in each subnet in the path.

To improve the UX and make cross-net gas costs more predictable, each subnet publishes basic parameters of their gas model at spawning time: 
- `gas_model_type` (if based on miner tipping, EIP1559-like, etc.)
- `curr_base_fee` (if any)
- etc.

> With this information, cross-net message will include an array of `gas_limit` amounts that the message is willing to allocate to each subnet in the hop. Subnets in the path won't be able to charge over the specified `gas_limit` for the subnet. When a cross-net reaches a subnet for which `gas_limit` is insufficient, it fails and an error message is propagated back to the source, along with the unspent gas.

Reviewer 2: Do you think it's possible to charge a flat fee for pass-through messages, ones that only need their meta-data appended to the top/bottom message list? I forget if they need message resolution, I think they do. But they don't get executed as smart contracts. 

Or are fees expected to fluctuate by demand? Perhaps have a flat rate in gas, but cost various amount of FIL based on prevalent gas prices? 

I can see how it would be a nightmare for users to keep track of where their message bounced, or even provision up front, because the `Value` is in FIL, while the `gas_limit` I assume is not, so in the end the final value delivered may be less than they intended. 

They might also expect that the network should delay the inclusion of their messages to a time when fees are more reasonable.

Reviewer 2: I suppose if we add price to the fees, then delaying is out of the question as it would necessarily have to hold up all other cross net messages as well, because of the nonces, to avoid out-of-order delivery.

Reviewer 2: Just noting that the mechanism to signal errors and return gas is not clearly reflected in the SCA interface (or SA). If it's some kind of cross message that source actors will receive, it should perhaps be specified so those actors know what they have to handle.

Author: > I can see how it would be a nightmare for users to keep track of where their message bounced, or even provision up front, because the Value is in FIL, while the gas_limit I assume is not, so in the end the final value delivered may be less than they intended.

Definitely, this really concerns me. We've had a lot of back-and-forth with the CEL team to see what is the best way to have this designed. As mentioned above, I think this deserves its own thread, so let me open a new PR to discuss this design. I'll ping you there.

> With this information, cross-net message will include an array of `gas_limit` amounts that the message is willing to allocate to each subnet in the hop. Subnets in the path won't be able to charge over the specified `gas_limit` for the subnet. When a cross-net reaches a subnet for which `gas_limit` is insufficient, it fails and an error message is propagated back to the source, along with the unspent gas.

Reviewer 2: > provision in the message value + sum(gas_limit_subnet)

I'm not familiar with the Filecoin gas model, but in Ethereum you have a gas_limit and also a gas_price (in gwei), with the fees being the product of the two. 

That suggests you need not just an _array of `gas_limit`_ but potentially an array of `gas_price` as well, and you would provision `value + sum(gas_limit * gas_price for (gas_limit, gas_price) in subnet_fee_limits)` in the source.

Reviewer 2: It would be worth mentioning what happens to over-provisioned gas in the happy path, not just when a message fails. Does the sender get it back in the final destination, or do they trickle back to the source? If the latter, at what cost?
